The Ministry of Public Health Care of Ukraine HMEIU 
“Ukrainian Medical Stomatological Academy” 
 
 
Viktor M. Bobyrov, Olena M. Vazhnicha, Tetyana 
O. Devyatkina, Natalia M. Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
PHARMACOLOGY 
 
 
 
 
 
Textbook for students of medical 
 
higher educational institutions 
 
 
 
4th edition, updated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vinnytsya 
 
Nova Knyha 
 
2018 

УДК 615(075) 
 
ББК 52.81я73 
 
Ф24 
 
Рекомендовано Міністерством охорони здоров’я України к підручник для студентів 
вищих медичних навчальних закладів ІV рівня акредитації, які опановують дисципліну 
англійською мовою (лист № 08.01-47/1159 від 02.07.2009). 
 
Рекомендовано вченою радою Вищого державного навчального закладу України 
"Українська медична стоматологічна академія" як підручник для англомовних 
студентів медичних факультетів вищих навчальних закладів МОЗ України" 
(протокол засідання вченої ради від 18.04.2018 р. №7) 
 
Рецензенти: 
 
Кресюн В. Й. — авідувач кафедри загальної та клінічної фармакології Одеського 
державного медичного університету , член-кореспондент НАМН України , лауреат 
Державної премії України, заслужений діяч науки і техніки України, д. мед. н., професор 
 
Шеремета Л. М. — завідувач кафедри фармакології Івано-Франківського 
національного медичного університету, д. мед. н., професор. 
 
Автори: 
 
Бобирьов В.М. – професор кафедри експериментальної та клінічної фармакології 
 
ВДНЗУ «Українська медична стоматологічна академія», , лауреат Державної премії 
 
України, заслужений діяч науки і техніки України, д.мед.н., професор 
 
Важнича О.М. – професор кафедри експериментальної та клінічної фармакології ВДНЗУ 
 
«Українська медична стоматологічна академія», д.мед.н., професор 
 
Дев’яткіна Т.О. – завідувач кафедри експериментальної та клінічної фармакології 
 
ВДНЗУ «Українська медична стоматологічна академія», д.мед.н., професор 
 
Дев’яткіна Н.М. – викладач кафедри експериментальної та клінічної фармакології 
 
ВДНЗУ «Українська медична стоматологічна академія», к.мед.н. 
 
 
Фармакологія : підручник для студ. вищих мед. навч. закладів / 
 
Ф24 
В. М. Бобирьов, О. М. Важнича, Т. О. Дев’яткіна, Н. М. Дев’яткіна,. – Вид. 
 
4-те, оновл. та пеперобл. – Вінниця : Нова Книга, 2018. – 520 с. : іл. 
 
ISBN 978-966-382-553-3 
 
Підручник для студентів вищих медичних навчальних закладів III-ІV рівня 
акредитації складено згідно з програмою з фармакології та адресовано студентам 
 
 англомовною формою навчання. В підручнику викладено основні розділи фар-
макології, наведено характеристику лікарських засобів з урахуванням сучасних 
поглядів на їх механізми дії та застосування. 
УДК 615(075) 
 
ББК 52.81я73 
 
© Автори, 2018 
ISBN 978-966-382-553-3 
© Нова Книга, 2018 

UDC 615(075) 
 
BBC 52.81я73 
 
P56 
 
Recommended by the Ministry of Public Health of Ukraine as a textbook for students of 
higher medical educational institutions of the 4th level of accreditation with English as the 
language of instruction (the letter № 08.01-47/1159 of 02.07.2009 ) 
 
Recommended by the Academic Council of Higher State Educational Establishment of Ukraine 
“Ukrainian Medical Sromatological Academy” as a textbook for students of medical faculties of 
higher educational establishments of Ministry of Health of Ukraine with English as the language 
of instruction. (protocol of the meeting of Academic Council from 18/04/2018, No 7) 
 
Reviewers: 
 
Kresyun V. I. — Head of Department of Common and Clinical Pharmacology of Odessa 
National Medical University, Corresponding member of National Academy of Medical 
Scienses of Ukraine, M.D., Ph.D., Professor 
 
Sheremeta L. M. — Head of Department of Pharmacology of Ivano-Frankivsk National 
Medical University, M.D., Ph.D., Professor 
 
Authors: 
 
Bobyrov V.M. – Professor of Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology of 
 
HSEEU “Ukrainian Medical Sromatological Academy”, M.D., Ph.D., Professor 
 
Vaznicha O.M.– Professor of Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology of 
 
HSEEU “Ukrainian Medical Sromatological Academy”, M.D., Ph.D., Professor 
 
Devyatkina T.O. – Head of Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology of HSEEU 
 
“Ukrainian Medical Sromatological Academy”, M.D., Ph.D.,Professor 
 
Devyatkina N.M. – Assistant professor of Department of Experimental and Clinical 
Pharmacology of HSEEU “Ukrainian Medical Sromatological Academy”, Ph.D. 
 
 
Pharmacology : textbook / Viktor M. Bobyrov, Olena M. Vazhni-
P56 cha, Tetyana O. Devyatkina, Natalia M. Devyatkina. – 4th ed., updated 
and revised. – Vinnytsya : Nova Knyha, 2018. – 520 p. : il. 
 
ISBN 978-966-382-553-3 
 
The textbook for students of higher medical establishments of the 4th level of ac-
creditation has been written according to Pharmacology syllabus and addressed to 
English-speaking students. The textbook contains main chapters of Pharmacology, 
outlines the characteristics of medicinal drugs based on modern data concerning their 
mechanisms of action and usage. 
 
UDC 615(075) 
 
BBC 52.81я73 
 
© Authors, 2018 
ISBN 978-966-382-553-3 
© Nova Knyha, 2018 

CONTENTS 
 
Abbreviations .......................................................................................................... 6 
 
Preface. ................................................................................................................... 8 
 
Chapter 1. GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY. PHARMACOKINETICS........ 9 
 
Chapter 2.  GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY. PHARMACODYNAMICS .... 18 
 
Chapter 3.  DRUGS INHIBITING AFFERENT INNERVATION.................. 26 
 
Chapter 4.  DRUGS STIMULATING AFFERENT INNERVATION ............ 33 
 
Chapter 5.  СHOLINERGIC AGONISTS. ........................................................ 42 
 
Chapter 6.  СHOLINERGIC ANTAGONISTS ................................................. 52 
 
Chapter 7.  ADRENERGIC AGONISTS. .......................................................... 66 
 
Chapter 8.  ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISTS. HISTAMINE-, 
 
SEROTONIN- AND DOPAMINERGIC DRUGS .......................................... 77 
 
Chapter 9.  DRUGS FOR GENERAL ANESTHESIA. .................................... 90 
 
Chapter 10. ETHANOL. HYPNOTICS. 
 
ANTIEPILEPTIC AND ANTIPARKINSONIAN DRUGS ....... 100 
 
Chapter 11. NEUROLEPTICS. ANXIOLYTICS. SEDATIVES. 
 
LITHIUM SALTS ......................................................................... 115 
 
Chapter 12. OPIOID (NARCOTIC) ANALGESICS. ..................................... 130 
 
Chapter 13. NON-OPIOID ANALGESICS ..................................................... 143 
 
Chapter 14. ANALEPTICS. PSYCHOMOTOR STIMULANTS .................. 160 
 
Chapter 15. ANTI-DEPRESSANTS. ADAPTOGENS. 
 
NOOTROPS. ANOREXIGENS ................................................... 172 
 
Chapter 16. INOTROPIC DRUGS. .................................................................. 186 
 
Chapter 17. ANTIANGINAL DRUGS ............................................................. 197 
 
Chapter 18. ANTI-ARRHYTHMICS ............................................................... 212 
 
Chapter 19. ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS. HYPERTENSIVE AGENTS
 ............................................................................................................................ 226 
 
Chapter 20. ANTI-ATHEROSCLEROTIC DRUGS ...................................... 240 
 
Chapter 21. DRUGS ACTING ON HEMOPOIESIS (HEMATINICS) ........ 252 
 
Chapter 22. DRUGS ACTING ON BLOOD COAGULATION 
 
AND FIBRINOLYSIS .................................................................. 266 
 
Chapter 23. DRUGS ACTING ON RESPIRATORY SYSTEM .................... 281 
 
Chapter 24. GASTROINTESINAL DRUGS ................................................... 295 
 
Chapter 25. DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON 
 
THE MYOMETRIUM. DRUGS USED TO TREAT 
 
ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION. ..................................................... 317 
 
Chapter 26. HORMONAL PREPARATIONS. ............................................... 334 
 
Chapter 27. VITAMINS PREPARATIONS. ................................................... 358 
 
Chapter 28. ACIDS, ALKALIS, SALTS. DRUGS FOR 
 
TREATMENT OF OSTEOPOROSIS. ENZYMES 
 
AND ENZYMES INHIBITORS. GLUCOSE ............................. 381 

CONTENTS 
5 
 
 
Chapter 29. ANTISEPTICS AND DISINFECTANTS ................................... 390 
 
Chapter 30. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CHEMOTHERAPY. 
 
SULFONAMIDES. CHEMOTHERAPEUTICS OF 
 
DIFFERENT CHEMICAL STRUCTURE. 
 
ANTIFUNGAL DRUGS ............................................................... 405 
 
Chapter 31. ANTIBIOTICS .............................................................................. 421 
 
Chapter 32. ANTISPIROCHETAL DRUGS. 
 
ANTIMYCOBACTERIAL DRUGS. ANTIVIRAL AGENTS. 449 
 
Chapter 33. ANTIPROTOZOAL DRUGS ...................................................... 465 
 
Chapter 34. ANTIHELMINTICS. .................................................................... 480 
 
Chapter 35. PHARMACOTHERAPY OF ACUTE POISONINGS. 
 
RADIOPROTECTORS. .................................................................................. 488 
 
Chapter 36. GENERAL PRESCRIPTION. ..................................................... 501 
 
Selected references. ............................................................................................ 517 

ABBREVIATIONS 
 
ACE – angiotensin-converting enzyme 
Ach – acetylcholine 
 
ACTH – adrenocorticotropin 
 
ADH – antidiuretic hormone 
 
AIDS –aquired immune deficiency 
syndrome AP – action potential 
 
ATP – adenosin triphosphate 
 
AV – atrio-ventricular 
 
AZT – azidothymidine 
 
BAL – British antilewisite 
 
BP – blood pressure 
 
cAMP – cyclic adenosyl monophosphate 
CDCA – chenodeoxycholic acid CHF – 
congestive heart failure 
 
Chy – chylomicrones 
 
cGMP – cyclic guanylyl monophosphate 
CNS – central nervous system 
 
COMT – catechol-orto-methyltransferase 
COX – cyclooxygenase 
 
CTZ – chemoreceptor trigger zone 
 
DHFR – dehydrofolate reductase 
 
DHPS – dehydropteroate synthase 
 
DNA – desoxyribonucleic acid 
 
ECG – electrocardiogram 
 
EDRF – endogenous endothelial-derived relaxation factor 
 
EDTA – edentate (ethylendiamine tetraacetic acid) 
 
FAD – flavine adenine dinucleotide 
 
FMN – flavine adenine mononucleotide 
 
FSH – follicle-stimulating hormone 
 
GABA – γ-aminobutyric acid 
 
GI tract – gastrointestinal tract 
 
GnRH – gonadotropin releasing hormone 
HDL – high-density lipoproteins 
 
hCG – human chorionic gonadotropin 
hMG – human menopaustic gonadotropin 
 
HMG CoA –3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme 
A HIV – human immunodeficiency virus 5HT-
receptor – serotonin receptor 

ABBREVIATiONS 
7
 
IDDM – insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 
 
IM – intramuscular (-ly) 
 
INH – isoniazid 
 
IV – intravenous (-ly) 
 
LDL – low-density lipoproteins 
 
LH – luteinizing hormone 
 
MAO – monoaminooxydase 
 
mRNA – matrix RNA 
 
MRSA – meticillin-resistant staphylococci 
NAD – nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
 
NADP – nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate 
 
NIDDM – non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 
 
NREM-sleep – non-rapid eye movement sleep 
 
NRTI – nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor 
 
NSAID – non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug 
 
PABA – para-aminobenzoic acid 
 
PANS – parasympathetic autonomic nervous system 
 
PBP – penicillin binding proteins 
 
PDE – phosphodiesterase 
 
PFOR – pyruvate ferredoxine oxyreductase 
Pg – prostaglandin 
 
PPAR – nuclear receptors connected with unsaturated fatty acids 
 
REM-sleep – rapid eye movement sleep 
 
RNA –ribonucleic acid 
 
SA – sino-atrial 
 
SANS – sympathetic autonomic nervous 
system SC – subcutaneous (-ly) 
 
spp – speciales (Latin) 
 
SSRI – selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor 
 
STH – somatotropic hormone 
T3 – triiodthyronine 
T4 – thyroxine 
 
TRH – thyrotropin-releasing hormone 
 
t-PA – tissue plasminogen activators 
 
tRNA – transport RNA 
 
UDCA – ursodeoxycholic acid 
 
VLDL – very low density lipoproteins 
 
WPW-syndrome – Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome 

PREFACE 
 
Pharmacology is a branch of medical science being a base for all clinical 
sciences. The knowledge about drugs, their mechanisms of action and usage is 
necessary for every doctor regardless the speciality. 
 
The purpose of the textbook is to help the students of higher medical institu-
tions of the 4th level of accreditation to study general concepts of Pharmacology 
and properties of drugs acting on different systems of the human body. This 
textbook has been prepared in order to improve the students’ self-training for the 
lessons under the conditions of implementation of the educational system of 
Bolonga. It has been written according to Pharmacology syllabus for higher 
educatonal medical institu-tions approved by the Ministry of Health of Ukraine. 
 
The textbook consists of 36 chapters. Chapters 1, 2 are devoted to general 
phar-macology. All others, except chapter 36, include definitions of the respective 
groups, classification, data on pharmacokinetics, mechanism of action, 
pharmacodynamics, indications, side-effects, and contraindications of existing 
drugs. Chapter 36 contains information about prescription of different medicinal 
forms that is practical skill on Pharmacology. 
 
Some modern data concerning the drugs for treatment of osteoporosis, obesity, 
and erectile dysfunction were included into the 2nd edition of the textbook. 
 
To prepare represented book we have used international names of 
preparations, but sometimes Latin names also have been indicated (they are from 
the capital letter and with typical endings –um, -as, -a). 
 
The textbook contains many illustrations which are necessary to understand 
better the drugs mechanisms and effects.To illustrate this book we have used 
figures created by ourselves, as well as illustrations from Color Atlas on 
Pharmacology (Lullman H, Albrecht Z., Klaus M, Detlef B. Color Atlas of 
Pharmacology.– Thieme: Stuttgart – New-York, 2000. – 386 p.). Some figures are 
from the well known book “Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, 4th 
Edition” edited by R.Finkel, M.A.Clark, L.X.Cubeddu (Lippincott Williams and 
Wilkins, 2008. – 560 p.), Internet search systems, and other sources. 
 
The textbook contains a bibliography for further study. 
 
All remarks and comments concerning the contents of present textbook will 
be taken into consideration by the authors for a future edition. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY. 
 
PHARMACOKINETICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFINITION OF PHARMACOLOGY 
 
Pharmacology is the science about drugs. It studies their properties and use. 
The main task of pharmacology is to create new more effective medicinal drugs 
for treatment and prophylaxis of diseases. 
 
Pharmacology is integrated into the system of medical and biological sci-
ences. It receives necessary information from Chemistry, Biochemistry, Genetics, 
Microbiology, Immunology etc. At the same time, Pharmacology is the ground of 
the pharmacotherapy in all branches of the clinical medicine. 
 
MAIN CONCEPTS OF PHARMACOLOGY 
 
Medicinal drug is a medicinal remedy in the shape of medicinal form. Medicinal 
remedy is a medicinal substance approved for use in a clinic by the 
 
special committee of the country. 
 
Medicinal substance is a chemical substance or biological active substance 
which can prevent or lessen pathological processes and do a medical action. 
 
Medicinal form is a distinctive size, shape and external appearance of 
medicinal substance convenient for use. 

10 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
DRUG DEVELOPMENT 
 
Drug development includes many stages. It is very difficult and expensive. The 
process starts with the synthesis of novel chemical compounds or obtain- 
 
ing of medicinal substances from various sources (plants, animal tissues, 
microbial cultures, human cells). 
The next stage of drug development is preclinical testing with biochemical-
pharmacological 
investigations, 
toxicological 
investigations, 
study 
of 
pharmacokinet-ics and pharmaceutical technology (methods of drug formulation). 
Clinical testing starts with Phase I. During this phase the future drug is studied 
on healthy subjects and seeks to determine whether effects observed in animal experi-
ments also occur in humans. In Phase II potential drug is tested on selected patients 
for therapeutic effecacy in those diseases for which it is intended. In Phase III the 
drug is tested on large groups of patients and compared with standard treatments. 
During clinical trials many drugs are revealed to be unusable. It is known that only one 
new drug remains from approximately 10000 newly synthesized substances. 
 
The decision to approve a new drug is made by a National Regulatory Body. 
Following approval, the new drug may be marketed under a trade name. Long-
term postlicensing studies are the purpose of Phase IV of clinical trials. 
 
GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY 
 
GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY is a division of Pharmacology which 
studies general concepts of this science. These concepts are connected with 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics (fig. 1.1). 
 
 
PHARMACOLOGY = PHARMACOKINETICS + PHARMACODYNAMICS 
 
Fig. 1.1. Two sections of Pharmacology. 
 
PHARMACOKINETICS 
 
Pharmacokinetics is the section of Pharmacology that studies how the body 
acts on the drug. It studies: 
 
 
Routes of administration 
 
Absorption 
 
Distribution 
 
Biotransformation 
 
Elimination 
 
Excretion. 

Chapter 1.  GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY. PHARMACOKINETICS 
11
 
ROUTS OF DRUGS ADMINISTRATION 
 
Routs of drugs administration are divided into enteral routs (through the gut), 
parenteral routs (not through the gut), and topical application for local action (table 1.1). 
 
Table1.1. Routs of drugs administration 
 
Enteral routs 
Parenteral routs 
Topical application 
1. Sublingual (under the tongue) 1. Injections 
1. On the surface of skin 
2. Oral (by mouth, per os) 
2. Inhalations (through the 2. On the surface of mucous 
3. Rectal (in rectum) 
respiratory pathways) 
membrane 
3. Intranasal 
4. Transcutaneous 
 
After IV administration the drug has rapid onset and short duration of action. 
After oral administration it has slow onset of action, lower concentration, and 
more durative effect (fig. 1.2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.2. The comparison of drug concentration in blood in different 
 
routs of administration (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
 
After administration drug is absorbed and enter the blood. Then it is transported 
with blood and distributed in the body. After that drug is biotransformated and 
excreted. These processes results in drugs’ inactivation and elimination (fig. 1.3). 

12 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
ADMINISTRATION 
 
(INTO THE BODY) 
 
 
ABSORPTION 
 
(INTO THE BLOOD PLASMA) 
 
 
DISTRIBUTION 
 
(INTO THE BODY TISSUES) 
 
 
ELIMINATION = INACTIVATION + EXCRETION 
 
(FROM THE BODY) 
 
Fig.1.3. Schematic representation of drug absorption, distribution, and elimination. 
 
 
 
 
DRUG’S TRANSPORT 
 
THROUGH CELL MEMBRANE 
 
 
Passive diffusion of low weight lipid soluble 
 
and non-ionized molecules 
 
 
Passive diffusion (Filtration) of low-weight 
 
water-soluble drugs through aqueous pores 
 
 
Carrier-mediated active transport of polar molecules, 
 
non-organic ions, carbohydrates, amino acids 
 
 
Endocytosis (Pinocytosis) of big molecules and macromolecu- 
 
lar complexes 
 
Fig. 1.4. Schematic representation of a drug crossing through the cell membrane. 

Chapter 1.  GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY. PHARMACOKINETICS 
13
 
DRUGS ABSORPTION 
 
Absorption is the enter of a drug into the blood from the site of administration. First-
pass metabolism can occur with orally administered drugs. Drugs admin-istered orally 
are fist exposed to the liver and may be extensively metabolized before reaching the 
rest of the body Drugs administered IV enter directly into the systemic 
 
circulation and has direct access to the rest of the body. 
 
During the absorption drug crosses cell membranes. There are such kinds of this 
crossing as passive diffusion, filtration, active transport, and endocytosis (fig.1.4). 
 
Passive diffusion is directed down concentration gradient (fig. 1.5). It does not 
require energy or carrier and is not saturable. Facilitated diffusion (or filtration) also is 
down gradient and energy independent, but needs carrier and is saturable. Active 
transport is against gradient, needs energy ATP and carrier, it is saturable. 
 
 
A 
B 
C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.5. Passive diffusion (A), active transport (B), and endocytosis (C). 
 
Factors influencing absorption are: 
 
 
Chemical structure 
 
 
Water- or lipid-solubility 
 
 
Ionization 
 
 
A medicinal form 
 
 
The route of administration 
 
 
State of tissues in the site of administration. 
 
Bioavailability is the fraction of administered drug that reaches the systemic 
circulation. Factors that influence bioavailability are solubility of a drug, nature of 
a drug, chemical instability, first-pass hepatic metabolism. 
 
DRUGS TRANSPORT IN THE ORGANISM 
 
Drugs transport in the body is realized: 
 
 
by proteins of the plasma (e.g. aspirin, sulfa drugs, hormonal preparations, iron) 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
by lipoproteins of the plasma (e.g. vitamin A, vitamin D) 
 
 
by blood cells (e.g. antibiotics-macrolides) 
 
 
by the water fraction of the plasma (e.g. ions of sodium and potassium, 
glucose). 
  
DRUGS DISTRIBUTION 
 
Distribution is the process by which a drug leaves the blood stream and 
enters the intersticium (extracellular fluid or the cells of the tissues) 
 
Distribution depends on: 
 
 
The drug structure 
 
 
The binding of drugs to plasma proteins 
 
 
The blood flow 
 
 
The capillary permeability (blood-tissue barriers, e.g. the blood-brain bar-
rier, placental barrier). 
The transfer of drugs into the brain is regulated by the blood-brain barrier. 
The capillary membrane between the plasma and brain cells is much less 
permeable to water-soluble drugs than is the membrane between plasma and other 
tissues. The blood vessels of the fetus and mother are separated by a number of 
tissue layers that collectively constitute the placental barrier. Drugs that traverse 
this barrier will reach the fetal circulation. The placental barrier, like the blood-
brain barrier, does not prevent transport of all drugs but is selective, and factors 
that regulate passage of drugs through any membrane are applicable here. 
 
BIOTRANSFORMATION OF DRUGS 
 
Biotransformation is metabolism of drugs in the body. The main organ for drugs 
metabolism is the liver. Biotransformation is realized in two stages (fig. 1.6). 
 
 
 
DRUG 
Stage I 
Stage II 
(non-synthetic reactions) 
(synthetic reactions) 
Active or, 
Inactive 
most often, 
products ex- 
inactive 
creted from 
products 
the body 
  
Fig. 1.6. Stages of drugs biotransformation. 

Chapter 1.  GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY. PHARMACOKINETICS 
15
 
Stage I reactions are non-synthetic and include oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis. 
Microsomal oxidation/reduction with participation of enzymes of cytochrome P-450 
system is an important way of biotransformation of many drugs. The result of stage I is 
the formation of active or inactive products which enter the stage II reactions. 
Stage II reactions are synthetic (conjugation with glucuronic and sulfuric 
acids, methylation, acethylation). They lead to the formation of inactve metabolits 
excreted from the body. 
 
Drugs which increase the activity of microsomal enzymes in the liver are named 
the inductors of microsomal oxidation (e.g. phenobarbital, chlorpromazine). 
 
Drugs which decrease the activity of microsomal enzymes in the liver are 
named the inhibitors of microsomal oxidation (e.g. metronidazole). 
 
MAIN PATHWAYS OF DRUGS EXCRETION 
 
Excretion is the process by which drug leaves the body. 
 
Drugs are excreted: 
 
 
A 
Hydrophilic drug 
B Lipophilic drug 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Slow conversion 
in liver to 
hydrophilic metabolite 
 
 
 
Renal 
Renal excretion 
excretion 
of metabolite 
 
Fig. 1.7. Renal excretion of hydrophilic (A) and lipophilic drugs (B) (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
with urine (e.g. sulfa drugs, hypnotics and majority of other drugs) 
 
 
with bile (e.g. antibiotic tetracycline) 
 
 
with mother’s milk (e.g. hypnotics, antibiotics, antihistamines) 
 
 
with saliva (e.g. bismuth preparations) 
 
 
with sweat ( e.g. bromides, chlorides) 
 
 
with air (ether for narcosis). 
 
The majority of drugs are excreted by the kidneys. Hydrophilic drugs may be 
excreted through the kidney in an unchanged form; lipophilic drugs are converted 
into hydrophilic metabolites which are excreted with urine (fig. 1.7). 
 
Drugs and their metabolites enter primary urine by glomerular filtration and 
active secretion in proximal tubules (fig. 1.8). After that lipid soluble and un-
ionized drugs are reabsorbed in distal tubules. Ionized, lipid-insoluble substances 
stay in urine and are excreted. 
 
 
Glomerular filtration 
 
Primary 
 
urine 
 
Active secretion in 
proximal tubules 
Passive reabsorption of 
lipid-soluble and un- 
 
ionized drugs in distal 
 
tubules 
 
Fig. 1.8. Drugs elimination in the kidney. 
 
 
 
 
Excretion of ionized 
lipid-insoluble com-
pounds with urine 
 
 
PHARMACOKINETIC METRICS 
 
Pharmacokinetics is the mathematical description of the rate and extent of 
uptake, distribution of drugs in the body. The following are the most commonly 
measured pharmacokinetic metrics. Some of them are measured directly (maximal 
and minimal concentration, time to reach maximal concentration), other ones are 
calculated (volume of distribution, elimination half-life, elimination rate constant, 
area under the curve, clearance, bioavailability). 
 
Bioavailability is the systemically available fraction of a drug. Bioavailability is a 
subcategory of absorption and is the fraction of an administered dose of unchanged 

Chapter 1.  GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY. PHARMACOKINETICS 
17
 
drug that reaches the systemic circulation. When a medication is administered in-
travenously, its bioavailability is 100%. When the medication is administered via 
other routes, its bioavailability decreases. Absolute bioavailability compares the 
bioavailability of the active drug in systemic circulation following non-
intravenous administration with the bioavailability of the same drug following 
intravenous ad-ministration. Relative bioavailability measures the bioavailability 
of a formulation of a certain drug when compared with another formulation of the 
same drug, usually an established standard, or through administration via a 
different route. Relative bioavailability is one of the measures used to assess 
bioequivalence between two drug products. 
 
Volume of distribution is the apparent volume in which a drug is distributed 
(i.e., the parameter relating drug concentration to drug amount in the body) 
 
Elimination half-life is the time required for the concentration of the drug to 
reach half of its original value 
 
Steady state concentration is the concentration at stedy state, the situation 
where the overall intake of a drug is fairly in dynamic equilibrium with its 
elimina-tion. Steady state is reached when a time of 4 to 5 times the half-life for a 
drug after regular dosing is started. 
 
Area under the curve is the integral of the concentration-time curve after a 
single dose or in steady state. 
 
Clearance is the volume of plasma cleared of the drug per unit time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.9. Steady state concentration. 

TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Absorption is: 
 
 
Drug’s penetration from the site of administration into the blood 
 
 
Drug’s penetration from the blood into tissues 
 
 
Chemical transformation of the drug 
 
 
Drugs interaction 
 
 
Binding to plasma proteins 
 
№2. In the blood plasma drugs are transported: 
 
 
In connection with albumens 
 
 
In connection with lipoproteins 
 
 
In connection with blood cells 
 
 
In water fraction 
 
 
All the listed. 
 
№3. The energy-independent mechanisms of drugs crossing through the cell membrane are: 
 
 
Active transport 
 
 
Endocytosis 
 
 
Passive diffusion 
 
 
“Biological pumps” 
 
 
Filtration through pores. 
 
№4. Drugs administered by injections: 
 
 
Have a slow onset of action 
 
 
Must be sterile 
 
 
Are suitable for emergence help 
 
 
Need the special equipment 
 
 
Are accompanied by trauma and pain. 
 
№5. Phenobarbital is the inducer of microsomal oxidation in the liver. Warfarin 
is an anticoagulant also biotranformed in microsomes of the liver. What changes in 
warfarin dosage may be necessary, if it is co-administered with phenobarbital? 
 
The dose should be decreased due to the inhibition of metabolism of the drug 
 
 
The dose should be increased due to the stimulation of metabolism of the drug 
 
 
The dose should be without any changes 
 
 
The dose should be abolished due to its accumulation 
 
 
All is false. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – A; № 2 – E; № 3 – C, E; № 4 – B, C, D, E; № 5 – B. 

Chapter 2.  GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY. PHARMACODYNAMICS 
19
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY. 
 
PHARMACODYNAMICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHARMACODYNAMICS 
 
Pharmacodynamics is the section of Pharmacology which studies how the 
drug acts on the body. 
 
It describes: 
 
 
Effects 
 
 
The mechanism of action 
 
 
Drugs interactions 
 
 
Doses 
 
 
Dose-effect dependence 
 
 
Factors influencing a drug action. 
 
TYPES OF DRUGS DOSES 
 
The dose is the amount of drug administered into the body. 
 
The dose may be: 
 
 
single (for single administration), daily (for the day of treatment), total 
(for the course of treatment) 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
threshold (minimal dose which begins to act) 
 
 
therapeutic (minimal, average, maximal) – the dose which has therapeutic action 
 
 
toxic (minimal, average, maximal) – the dose which causes toxic action 
 
 
mortal (the dose which causes the death of animals in experiments) 
 
 
striking dose (a large dose at the start of treatment), supporting dose (an indi-
vidual dose for supporting a therapeutic effect during long-term treatment). 
  
TYPES OF DRUGS ACTION 
 
Drugs action is displayed as changes in the function of organs and systems. 
 
There are such types of drugs action: 
 
 
local (in the site of administration), resorptive (after the absorption into 
the blood) 
 
 
direct (in the organ with target cells), indirect (in other organs, but due to 
the action on the target organ), reflexive (by reflexes) 
 
 
non-selective (on all cells), selective (on celected cells and tissues) 
 
 
reversible (with restoration to the initial state after the elimination of the 
drug), irreversible (without the restoration to the initial state after the 
elimi-nation of the drug) 
 
 
main effects (for which the drug is used), side-effects (unwanted effects 
of a therapeutic dose of the drug). 
The factors influencing drug action are the age, weight, gender, 
physiological state, illness, genetic factors. 
Genetic factors represent an important source of interindividual variation in 
drug response. Relatively few adverse drug effects with a pharmacodynamic basis 
are known, and most of the well characterised inherited traits take the form of 
genetic polymorphisms of drug metabolism. Monogenic control of N-acetylation, 
S-methylation and cytochrome P450-catalysed oxidation of drugs can have impor-
tant clinical consequences. Individuals who inherit an impaired ability to perform 
one or more of these reactions may be at increased risk of concentration-related 
toxicity. Pharmacogenetics is the study of inherited genetic differences in drug 
metabolic pathways which can affect individual responses to drugs, both in terms 
of therapeutic effect as well as adverse effects. The term pharmacogenetics is 
often used interchangeably with the term pharmacogenomics which also 
investigates the role of genetic differences in relation to drug response and drug 
behaviour through examination of genes, gene products, and inter- and intra-
individual variation in gene expression and function. 

Chapter 2.  GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY. PHARMACODYNAMICS 
21
 
Circadian rhythms are genetically determined and are regulated by external 
synchronizers (light/day cycle). Several biological processes involved in the phar-
macokinetics and pharmacodynamics of drugs are subject to circadian variations. 
Chronopharmacology studies how biological rhythms impact on drug pharma-
cokinetics, pharmacodynamics and toxicity and determines whether time of day 
administration modifies drug's pharmacological characteristics. 
 
MECHANISMS OF ACTION 
 
Mechanisms of action are events in cells caused by the drug. 
 
Medicinal substances realize their action by: 
 
 
changing of the enzymes activity (e.g. neostigmine as 
acethylcholinesterase inhibitor) 
 
 
interaction with receptors (e.g. atropine as M-cholinoblocker) 
 
 
influence on ion channels (e.g. local anesthetics) 
 
 
influence on the transport systems 
 
 
the antimetabolic mechanism (e.g. methotrexate as folate antagonist) 
 
 
the action at the genes level (e.g. anti-cancer drugs). 
 
RECEPTOR THEORY 
 
Drug receptor is a specialized target macromolecule. The drug binds to the 
receptor with the formation of a drug-receptor complex producing primary 
pharma-cological effect (fig. 2.1). 
 
 
DRUG 
 
+ 
DRUG-RECEPTOR 
 COMPLEX 
 
 
RECEPTOR 
 
EFFECT 
 
Fig. 2.1. Schematic representation of drug-receptor relationship. 

 
Receptors are located: 

22 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
–   in membrane 
 
–   in cytoplasma 
 
–   in nuclei. 
 
 
 
A 
Na+ k+ 
Agonist 
ACh 
H2N 
γ
δ 
α
β 
α 
p
r
o
t
e
i
n 
3 4
5 6 7 
G- 
f
o
r 
Protein 
E
f
f
e
c
t 
 
COOH 
 
Effect 
 
Na+  K+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B 
 
ACh 
 
 
 
 
Nicotinic 
acetylcholine 
receptor 
 
 
 
 
Subunit 
consisting of 
four trans-
membrane 
domains 
 
Fig. 2.2. Connection of receptors with G-proteins (A) and ion channels (B) (by H. 
Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Receptors functions are achieved by: 
 
–   ion channels (fig. 2.2) 
 
–   cyclic nucleotides (c AMP) 
 
–   G- proteins (fig. 2.2) 
 
–   Ca++ and protein-kinases. 
 
Drugs interaction with receptors (fig. 2.3): 
 
Agonist is the drug which stimulates the receptor, induces its conformation and 
causes a specific cell answer (e.g. morphine is a strong agonist of opioid receptors). 
 
Antagonist is the drug which inhibits the receptor – it interacts with the receptor 
without its conformation, prevents binding of ligand to the receptor resulting in the 
absence of a specific cell answer (e.g. naloxone is an antgagonist of opioid receptors). 

Chapter 2.  GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY. PHARMACODYNAMICS 
23
 
Agonist-antagonist is the drug which stimulates one subtype of the receptor, but 
blocks another one (e.g. pentazocine is an agonist-antagonist of opioid receptors). 
 
Agonist 
Antagonist 
 
 
 
 
 
Receptor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agonist 
Antagonist 
 
induces active 
occupies receptor 
 
conformation of 
without con- 
 
receptor protein 
formational changes 
 
 
Fig. 2.3. Interaction of an agonist and an antagonist with the pharmacological receptor 
(adapted from H. Lüllmann, 2000) 
 
DRUGS INTERACTION 
 
Drugs interaction is the action of one drug on another one (table 
2.1). Table 2.1. Two types of drugs interaction 
 
Pharmaceutical 
Pharmacological 
(before the administration, 
(after the administration, inside the body) 
outside the body) 
1. Physical (changes in agregate 1. Pharmacokinetic (interaction during absorption, dis- 
state of drugs) 
tribution, biotransformation, and excretion) 
2. Chemical (chemical reac- 
2. Pharmacodynamic (intraction in tissues during binding 
tions between the drugs). 
to receptors). 
 
COMBINED ACTION OF DRUGS 

24 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Сombined action of drugs is the action of two or more co-administered drugs 
on the organism (table 2.2). 
 
Table 2.2. Main kinds of drugs combined action 
 
Synergism 
Antagonism 
(the strengthening of the effect) 
(the weakening of the effect) 
1. Addition (C = A + B) 
1. Chemical 
2. Potentiation (C > A + B). 
2. Physical 
3. Physiological (competition in binding to re- 
ceptors, action on different receptors with the 
opposite effect). 
 
SIDE-EFFECTS 
 
Side-effects are non-useful effects of drugs in therapeutic doses: 
 
            Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ 
irect toxic effects (e.g. ototoxicity, neurotoxicity, and nefrotoxicity of 
streptomycin) 
            Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ 
llergic reactions as immune reactions of hypersensitivity (e.g. 
anaphylaxis caused by penicillin) (fig. 2.4) 
            Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ   
diosyncrasy as an abnormal reaction occurred after the fist drug administra-
tion and caused by genetic factors (e.g. hemolysis of erythrocytes afer the use 
of quinine in patients deficient on glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase) 
 
            Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ 
mbryotoxic, fetotoxic and teratotogenous effects as a negative influence 
on the embrio and the fetus during pregnancy (e.g. hypoplasia of tooth 
enamel caused by tetracyclin) – table 2.3 
 
            Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ 
 cancerogenous and mutagenous action as the ability to provoke the 
development of malignant tumors (e.g. secondary malignancy caused by 
leukopoiesis inhibitors). 

Chapter 2.  GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY. PHARMACODYNAMICS 
25
 
 
IgE 
 
 
 
 
Mast coll 
(tissue) 
Receptor 
basophilic 
for IgE 
granulocyte 
(blooc) 
Hist amino and other mediators 
Urticaria, asthma, shock 
 
 
Fig. 2.4. Allergic reaction (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Table 2.3. Drugs negative influence on the embryo and the fetus 
 
Age of the fetus 
1-2 
2,5-12 
12-38 
(weeks) 
Development stage 
Nidation 
Embryo: organ 
The fetus: growth and 
development 
maturation 
Fetal death 
Malformation 
Functional disturbances 
 
EFFECTS OF REPEATED DOSES OF DRUGS 
 
Accumulation (material and functional) is the accumulation of the drug or its 
effects (e.g, material accumulation of digitoxin, functional accumulation of antide-
pressants). 
 
Tolerance (habituation) is a decrease of drug’s action after its repeated 
admin-istration (e.g, tolerance to hypnotics, alcohol, nitroglycerine, laxatives). 
 
Tachyphylaxis is the rapid form of tolerance developing during the first day 
of treatment (e.g, tachyphylaxis to ephedrine). 
 
Drug dependence is irresistible aspiration to take the drug for euphoria or 
improvement of condition. 
There are two types of drug dependence: 

 
Physical dependence – if the patent wants to take the drug for altering 
general state and mood. It is characterized by abstinence. Abstinence is a 
phenomena of deprivation. Ethyl alcohol and narcotic analgesics may 
cause physical dependence. 
 
 
Psychological dependence – if the patient wants to take the drug for 
alter-ing the mood (for euphoria). Such kind of drug dependence is 
caused by psychomotor stimulants. 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. All concerning doses of drugs is correct, except: 
 
 
Single dose is the dose for one administration 
 
 
Therapeutic dose may be minimal, overage, and maximal 
 
 
LD-50 causes the death of 50% of animals in experiments 
 
 
Supporting dose is a high dose at the start of treatment 
 
 
Toxic dose is the amount of the drug causing poisoning. 
 
№2. The notions connected with a combined action of medications are: 
 
 
Synergism and antagonism 
 
 
Material accumulation 
 
 
Drug dependence 
 
 
Tolerance and tachyphylaxis 
 
 
Elimination and excretion. 
 
№3. Types of drugs’ action are represented by: 
 
 
A local and resorptive action 
 
 
A reversible and irreversible action 
 
 
A direct and indirect action 
 
 
Pharmaceutical drugs interaction 
 
 
A combined action of drugs. 
 
№4. The true information concerning the receptor mechanism of action is: 
 
 
The drug stimulating the receptor is its agonist 
 
 
The drug inhibiting the receptor is its antagonist 
 
 
The drug stimulating one subtype of receptor and inhibiting another one 
is an agonist-antagonist 
 
The drug bound to the receptor with low affinity is a partial agonist 
 
 
The drug without affinity to the receptor is its strong agonist. 

Chapter 3.  DRUGS INHIBITING AFFERENT INNERVATION 
27
 
№5. The patient with malaria was treated with quinine. Treatment was com-
plicated by hemolysis of red blood cells. Such a side-effect caused by quinine in 
patients with deficit of glucose-6- phosphate dehydrogenase is: 
 
 
A direct toxic action 
 
 
Idiosyncrasy 
 
 
An allergic reaction 
 
 
A cancerogenous action 
 
 
A teratogenous action. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – D; № 2 – A; № 3 – A, B, C; № 4 – A, B, C, D; № 5 – B. 

28 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DRUGS INHIBITING 
AFFERENT INNERVATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DRUGS INHIBITING AFFERENT INNERVATION 
 
Drugs inhibiting afferent innervation are divided into local anesthetics, 
astrin-gents, adsorbents, and protectives (coverings). 
 
DRUGS FOR LOCAL ANESTHESIA 
 
Local anesthesia 
 
Local anesthesia is reversibly inhibition of the pain sensation in a limited 
area of the body without impairment of consciousness. 
 
The kinds of local anesthesia are: 
 
 
surface anesthesia 
 
 
infiltration anesthesia 
 
 
conduction anesthesia 
 
 
spinal anesthesia. 
 
LOCAL ANESTHETICS 

Chapter 3.  DRUGS INHIBITING AFFERENT INNERVATION 
29
 
Local anesthetics are the drugs for local anesthesia. Their molecules have 3 
common structural elements: lypophilic aromatic part, hydrophylic amine and 
ester or amide linkage. All local anesthetics are weak bases and alkalic pH 
increases their ability to penetrate lipophilic barriers and cell membranes (fig. 3.1). 
 
pH value 
Active form 
Membrane- 
catlonlc- 
permeable 
amphlphlllc 
form 
R 
+  R' 
R 
R' 
N 
N 
H 
R'' 
R'' 
Ability to penetrate 
Poor 
lipophilic 
Good 
barriers and 
cell membranes 
 
 
Fig. 3.1. The influence of pH on properties of local anesthetics. 
 
Classification 
 
 Esters of para-aminobenzoic acid 
 
–  Procaine (Novocainum) 
 
–  Benzocaine (Anaesthesinum) 
 
–  Tetracaine (Dicainum) 
 
 Substituted amides of acetalinidin 
 
–  Lidocaine 
 
–  Trimecaine 
 
–  Piromecaine 
 
–  Articaine, Ultracaine 
 
–  Marcaine (Bupivacaine). 
 
Distinctive features of local anesthetics of different groups 

30 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Existing groups of local anesthetics differ from one another on duration of ac-
tion, biotransformation, stability in the site of inflammation, and the interaction with 
 
sulfonamides (table 3.1). 
 
Table 3.1. Distinguishes between the esters and the amides 
 
Esters 
Amides 
Have short action 
Have long action 
Are metabolized by esterases of blood 
Are metabolized in the liver 
Are not active at acid pH (in the site of purulent 
Are active at acid pH (in the site of 
inflammation) 
purulent inflammation) 
Decrease the effect of sulfa drugs. 
Do not interact with sulfa drugs. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Local anesthetics plug sodium-ion channels and in such a way block 
initiation and propagation of action potential (fig. 3.2). 
 
Local anesthetic 
 
Propagated 
 
impulse 
 
 
Na+ -entry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.2. Mechanism of action of local anesthetics (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Purpose of adrenaline addition to local anesthetics 
 
Addition of adrenaline to solutions of local anesthetics causes constriction of 
blood vessels. That results in a decrease of the absorption of a local anesthetic and 
leads to the prolongation of anesthesia. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 

Chapter 3.  DRUGS INHIBITING AFFERENT INNERVATION 
31
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 
D 
 
Fig. 3.3. Medicinal plants containing astringent substances: 
 
A – oak; B – sant john’s-wort; C – salvia; D – chamomile. 

32 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Procaine (Novocainum) is an ester; dilates blood vessels; is used for 
infiltration, conductive and spinal anesthesia; other indications are spasms of 
blood vessels and smooth muscles, pain syndromes, arrhythmia, toxicosis of 
pregnancy; may cause allergic complications including anaphylaxis, collapse, 
hypotension, seizures (in overdose). 
 
Tetracaine (Dicainum) is an ester; dilates blood vessels; is more active and 
more toxic than procaine; is used only for surface anesthesia. 
 
Benzocaine (Anaesthesinum) is an ester; is less active than procaine; is not 
dissolved in water; is used only for surface anesthesia in burns, wounds, diseases 
of skin and mucous membranes; is not toxic, but may cause methemoglobin 
formation when is used on large areas of skin lesions. 
 
Lidocaine (Xycainum) is the amide; acts longer than procaine; is more 
active; is suitable for all types of anesthesia; is used for the treatment of 
ventricular tachyar-rhythmia (IV). 
 
Trimecaine is an amide; pharmacological properties are similar to lidocaine. 
Bupivacaine (Marcaine) is an amide; is one of the most active local anesthetics; is 
used for infiltration, conductive and spinal anesthesia; has toxic action on the heart. 
Articaine is an amide; more active than lidocaine and procaine; acts during 1-5 
 
hrs; is used for infiltration and conductive anesthesia; is widely used in dentistry. 
 
Combination of articaine with vasoconstrictor is known as Ultracaine. 
 
ASTRINGENTS 
 
Astringents are the agents that precipitate protein and form albuminates on 
the surface of the damaged skin or the mucous membrane, thus protecting the 
receptors from irritating factors and relieving pain. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 Organic substances 
 
–  Tannin 
 
–  Tanalbinum 
 
–  herb of Saint-John’s-wort (herba Hyperici) 
 
–  flowers of chamomile (flos Chamommillae) 
 
–  leaves of salvia (folium Salviae) 
 
–  bark of oak (Cortex Quercus) 
 
 Non-organic substances 
 
–  Bismuth subnitrate. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Tannin is an organic astringent; is used in the form of solution, ointment, powder 
for external use; has astringent and anti-toxic action (is an antidote in poisonings 

Chapter 3.  DRUGS INHIBITING AFFERENT INNERVATION 
33
 
with alkaloids and salts of metals); is used for gargling in diseases of oral mucose, 
for processing of burns, for lavage of stomach in acute poisonings; may disturb 
digestion if it is taken orally. 
 
Tanalbinum is a compound of tannin; is taken orally to treat dyspepsia, enteritis, 
enterocolitis; does not bind to enzymes in the gut and does not disturb digestion. 
 
Bark of oak (Cortex Quercus) (fig. 3.3) is used in the form of decoction; is 
applied for gargling in stomatitis, gingivitis, paradontitis; may be also used to treat 
burns, wounds. 
 
Leaves of salvia (Folium Salviae), herb of sant-john’s-wort (Herba 
Hyperici), flowers of chamomile (Flos Chamommillae) (fig. 3.3) are used in the 
form of infusions; they have astringent, anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial effects, 
stimulate regeneration of tissues; indications are similar to indications for the use 
of the oak bark; are widely used in dentistry. 
 
Bismuth subnitrate is non-organic astringent; is taken orally in ulcer of the 
stomach and duodenum, enterocolitis; is applied topically to treat wounds, ulcers, 
and burns of skin. 
 
ADSORBENTS 
 
Adsorbents are insoluble fine powders which have a large active surface 
capa-ble of fixing irritating and poisonous substances dissolved in water and 
gases, thus preventing their absorption in the GI tract and protecting receptors. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Activated charcoal (Carbo activatus) is administered orally in the form of 
tablets or non-dosed powder; is used in acute poisonings (as a universal antidote), 
as well as in enterocolitis, enteritis, dyspepsia, meteorism. 
 
Enterosgel has porous structure of hydrophobic silicone matrix, which is 
char-acterized by a sorption action with respect only to toxic metabolites of 
molecular weight 70-1000. In the lumen of the GI tract, the drug binds and 
removes from the body endogenous and exogenous toxic substances of various 
nature. Enterosgel does not reduce the absorption of vitamins and trace elements. 
It is used in adults and children as a detoxification agent. 
 
PROTECTIVES 
 
Protectives are the substances that form colloidal solutions covering the skin 
and mucous membranes and prevent stimulation of receptors. Mucus of starch 
(Mucilago Amyli) and decoction from seeds of flax (Linum) belong to this group. 
They are applied topically to treat burns, wounds, ulcers in mucous membranes 
and are taken orally in acute gastritis, enterocolitis or together with drugs which 
irritate gastric mucosa. 

34 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Local anesthetics from esters group are all, except: 
 
 
Procaine (Novocainum) 
 
Tetracaine (Dicainum) 
 
Benzocaine (Anaesthesinum) 
 
Cocaine 
 
Lidocaine (Xycainum). 
 
№2. Tannin realizes its anti-inflammatory action due to: 
 
 
The formation of albuminates on the surface of the mucous membrane 
 
The adsorbtion of toxic substances 
 
The formation of colloidal covering on the mucous membrane 
 
Local anesthesia 
 
The irritation of sensitive nerve endings. 
 
№3. Local anesthetics have the following common properties: 
 
 
They are bases 
 
The anesthetic activity rises at alkaline pH 
 
Ester local anesthetics are metabolized by esterases in blood 
 
Amide local anesthetics are metabolized by hepatocytes 
 
The duration of action of esters is longer than that of amides. 
 
№4. The starch mucus realizes its action due to: 
 
 
The formation of albuminates on the surface of the mucous membrane 
 
The adsorbtion of toxic substances 
 
The formation of colloidal covering on the mucous membrane 
 
Local anesthesia 
 
The protection of sensitive nerve endings from irritation. 
 
№5. Lidocaine was administered to the patient with ventricular tachyarrhythmia 
and caused stabilization of the heart rate. Its mechanism of action is: 
 
 
The blockage of sodium ion channels 
 
The blockage of calcium ion channels 
 
The opening of potassium channels 
 
The blockage of adrenergic receptors 
 
None of the listed above. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – E; № 2 – A; № 3 – A, B, C, D; № 4 –C, E; № 5 – A. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DRUGS STIMULATING 
AFFERENT INNERVATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DRUGS STIMULATING AFFERENT INNERVATION 
 
They are represented by drugs increasing the frequency of afferent impulses 
running from sensitive nerve endings to CNS. 
 
Classification 
 
A. Irritants 
 
–  Menthol 
 
–  Mustard seeds 
 
–  Solution of Ammonia 
 
–  Camphor 
 
–  Purified turpentine (Turpentine oil) 
 
 
Expectorants (reflexly acting) 
 
–  Herb of Thermopsis 
 
–  Root of Althea 
 
–  Mucaltinum 
 
 
Bitters 
 
–  Tincture of Absinthium 

36 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
D. Emetic drugs (reflexly acting) 
 
–  Root of Ipecacuanna 
 
–  Copper sulfate 
 
–  Zinc sulfate 
 
 
Laxatives and purgatives 
 
 
Acting in the small intestine 
 
–  Castor oil 
 
 
Acting in bowels 
 
–  Root of Rheum 
 
–  Leaves of Senna 
 
–  Bisacodyl 
 
 
Acting in all the sections of the intestine 
 
–  Magnesium sulfate 
 
–  Sodium sulfate. 
 
Irritants 
 
Irritants are medications irritating sensetive nerve endings in the skin and 
mucous membranes and producing local vascular reactions, reflexive actions, and 
distractive effects. 
 
Menthol 
 
 
is crystals with pleasant aroma dissolved in lipids and alcohol 
 
 
is contained in mint (fig. 4.1) 
 
 
is applied topically, is administered sublingually (as Validol) or by 
inhala-tions 
 
irritates cold-sensitive nerve endings in the skin and mucous membranes, 
constricts blood vessels in the site of application, that’s why locally de-
creases the edema and exudation; initiates reflexes changing vascular 
tone in the heart and brain tunics; decreases pain from internal organs and 
deep tissues (due to prevalence of pain impulses from the covering 
tissues over the impulsation from the internal tissues) 
 
 
indications: myositis, myalgia, peripheral neuritis, neuralgia, arthritis, ar-
thralgia, bronchitis, inflammation of respiratory airways, rhinitis, 
headache, spasm of coronary blood vessels (in the form of Validol), in 
dentistry is used as drops for a diminishing a toothache and for 
improvement of taste and odor of dental pastes, dental powders 
 
 
may cause disturbances of breathing if it is used for inhalation in high 
concentration. 

Chapter 4.  DRUGS STIMULATING AFFERENT INNERVATION 
37
 
Mustard seeds 
 
 is a plant preparation (fig. 4.1) in the form of a mustard plaster or mustard 
bags 
 
 is applied topically 
 
 contains glycoside synegrin and enzyme myrosin; in warm water (38ºC) 
myrosin destroys synegrin with release of mustard oil; this oil irritates 
sen-sitive nerve endings in the skin, dilates blood vessels and improves 
trophy in the site of application; has reflexive action and decreases pain 
in internal tissues; reflexly lowers BP, decreases anginal pain, accelerates 
recovering from pneumonia 
 
 indications: myositis, myalgia, peripheral neuritis, neuralgia, arthritis, ar-thralgia, 
pneumonia (is applied on the skin projections of the lungs), angina pectoris 
(on the area of the heart), hypertension (on the occipital area) 
 
 may cause severe irritation and burn of the skin. 
 
 
A 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.1. Medicinal plants containing irritants: A – mint; B – mustard. 
 
 
Solution of ammonia 
 
 
has antimicrobial, weak detergent, irritating and reflexive actions 
 
 
is used for reflexive stimulation of respiration in syncope. For this purpose it 
is applied on the beat of the cotton and used for inhalation through the 

38 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
nose, irritates sensitive nerve endings in the nasal mucosa, initiates 
reflexes, stimulates the centers in the medulla of the brain and in such a 
way stimulates respiration and increases BP 
 
 is used for processing of surgeon’s hands 
 
 high concentration of ammonia vapors may cause burn of the mucous 
membrane and arrest of breathing. 
 
Camphor 
 
Camphor is a neurotropic drug (analeptic) with antimicrobial and irritative effects. It 
is used topically to treat myositis, myalgia, peripheral neuritis, neuralgia, arthritis, 
arthralgia, external otitis, for prevention of the skin necrosis in immobilized patients. 
 
PURIFIED TURPENTINE 
 
Purified turpentine (turpentine oil) is made from conifers mainly pine trees. 
It has disinfecting, distracting, irritating, and analgesic effect. Irritant effect is 
exerted by active substances, which are released under the influence of turpentine: 
histamine and other mediators cause skin reddening, minor swelling, vasodilation; 
endorphins and enkephalins produce anesthesia. Purified turpentine is used as 
ingredient of liniments and ointments in diseases of peripheral nerves, muscles, 
joints as well as acute and chronic diseases of bronchi and lungs. 
 
Expectorants 
 
Expectorants are drugs which stimulate the secretion and expelling of liquid 
sputum from the bronchi. 
 
Reflexly acting expectorants irritate receptors of the stomach mucosa, initiate 
reflexes, due to which increases the secretion of bronchial glands, the contractility of 
the epithelium and muscles and help mucus expelling. Infusion from the grass of 
Thermopsis (fig. 4.2) also excites the respiratory center. Decoction from the root of 
Althea and Mucaltinum (fig. 4.2) have a covering effect. 

Chapter 4.  DRUGS STIMULATING AFFERENT INNERVATION 
39
A 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.2. Medicinal plants containing expectorants: A – Thermopsis; B – Althea. 
 
BITTERS 
 
Bitters are drugs stimulating appetite (appetizers) by irritation of receptors in 
the oral cavity. Tincture of Absinthium (fig. 4.3) is a representative of this phar-
macological group. 
 
Irritation of taste-sensitive nerve endings initiates reflexes resulting in the 
stimulation of gastric juice production. The reflexive mechanism of the action of 
bitters was investigated by a Russian physiologist I.P.Pavlov. 
 
Bitters are taken orally before meals in asthenia, a loss of appetite after 
surgeries and infections, in hypoacidic gastritis. 
 
Bitters may cause inhibition of gastric secretion if they are taken during or 
after meals. 

40 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.3. Arthemisia absinthium containing bitter. 
 
EMETIC DRUGS 
 
Emetic drugs are medications provoking vomiting. 
 
They are divided into: 
 
 
Drugs of central action – apomorphine hydrochloride acting on the 
chemo- receptors of the trigger zone (CTZ) connecting to the emetic center. 
Apomorphine is a dopaminergic preparation. It causes stimulation of CTZ and 
provokes vomiting; is used in acute poisonings; may cause the rupture of stomach 
wall and esophagus, an increase in BP; is contraindicated in poisonings with acids 
and alkalis, ulcer of the stomach, acute abdomen, severe hypertension, pregnancy. 
 
 
Drugs of the peripheral action – plant drugs of Thermopsis, 
Ipecacuanna, sulfates of zinc and copper. They are administered orally, irritate 
sensitive nerve endings in the stomach and cause vomiting reflexly. Now these 
preparations are used rarely. 
 
LAXATIVES AND PURGATIVES (CATHARTICS) 
 
Laxatives and purgatives (cathartics) stimulate afferent nerves to initiate a 
reflex increase in gut motility (fig. 4.4). 

Chapter 4.  DRUGS STIMULATING AFFERENT INNERVATION 
41
Ricinoleic acid O СH2 
Castor oil 
Ricinoleic acid O СH2 
Ricinoleic acid O СH2 
  
Bile 
acids 
 
Lipase 
 
 
Glycerol + 
 
3 Ricinoleic acids 
C6H13 – CH – CH2 – CH = CH – (CH2)7 – COOH 
 
OH 
 
 
Fig. 4.5. Mechanism of action of Castor oil (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reduction 
 
Sugar cleavage 
 
 
Bacteria 
 
Anthraquinone 
glycoside 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.6. Mechanism of action of anthraquinone derivatives – 
 
large-bowel irritant laxatives (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 

42 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
Reflex 
Irritation 
Peristalsis 
of mucosa 
Filling 
Absorption 
Secretion 
 
of fluid 
 
Fig. 4.4. Stimulation of peristalsis by mucosal irritation (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Laxatives are classified according the site of action, as well as by the origin. 
Plant cathartics are divided into oils (Castor oil) and the drugs consisting of 
 
anthraguinone derivatives. 
 
Castor oil (Oleum Ricini) is bean oil which is hydrolyzed in the gut to the ri-
cinoleic acid and glycerol. The ricinoleic acid acts on the ileum and colon to 
induce an increased fluid secretion and colonic contraction (fig. 4.5). It is used in 
acute constipation. 
 
Anthraguinone derivatives (drugs of Senna, Rheum, Aloe, etc) . They are 
transformed to anthranol which irritates receptors of colon and produces 
evacuation in 8-10 hrs (fig. 4.6). The main drugs are senadexin, senade, cafiol etc. 
 
Synthetic drugs – isaphenin, bisacodyl, sodium picosulfate (guttalax) also ir-
ritate colon receptors and are used as antaguinone derivatives in chronic constipation. 
 
Osmotic purgatives (magnesium sulfate, sodium sulfate) increase lumen os-
molarity, drive additional fluid into the GI tract, and irritate intestine receptors. 
They are used in intoxication, acute constipation, before some diagnostic 
procedures, or in treatment with some antihelminthics. 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Mustard seeds realize their action by: 
 
 
The formation of albuminates 
 
 
The absorption of toxic substances 

Chapter 4.  DRUGS STIMULATING AFFERENT INNERVATION 
43
 
  Ā          Ȁ ⸀Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ            Ā 
he formation of colloidal covering 
 
  Ā          Ȁ ⸀Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ            Ā 
he stimulation of nerve endings in the gut 
 
  Ā          Ȁ ⸀Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ            Ā 
he irritation of sensitive nerve endings in the skin. 
 
№2. Menthol is characterized by all, except: 
 
 
The irritation of sensitive nerve endings 
 
 
A reflexive action on coronary blood vessels 
 
 
The constriction of blood vessels in the site of application 
 
 
Vasodilation in the site of application 
 
 
The improvement of taste and odor of dental powders and pastes. 
 
№3. The reflexly acting expectorants are: 
 
 
Sodium bicarbonate 
 
 
Trypsin 
 
 
Mucaltinum 
 
 
Infusion from the herb of Thermopsis 
 
 
Decoction from the root of Althea. 
 
№4. Bitters are: 
 
 
Stimulants of appetite 
 
 
Suppressors of appetite 
 
 
Drugs for replacement therapy 
 
 
Antimicrobial drugs for treatment of peptic ulcer 
 
 
Stimulants of gastric secretion. 
 
№5. A patient with chronic constipation was prescribed with a synthetic laxa-
tive. This drug is in the form of rectal suppositories. It is transformed 
into diphenol and acts in the bowels. What drug was prescibed? 
 
 
Castor oil 
 
 
Phenolphtalein 
 
 
Magnesium sulphate 
 
 
Root of Rheum 
 
 
Bisacodyl. 
 

Answers 
 
№ 1 – E; № 2 – D; № 3 – C, D, E; № 4 – A, E; № 5 – E. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
СHOLINERGIC AGONISTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 
The autonomic nervous system regulates the function of internal organs. It is 
divided into two sections: the sympathetic system (SANS) and the 
parasympathetic system (PANS) which exert opposite actions (table 5.1). 
 
Table 5.1. Some distinguishing features in the structure 
 
of the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems 
 
Part of the system 
Parasympathetic system 
Sympathetic system 
Centers (the 1st neuron) 
Medulla of the brain, sacral 
Thoraco-lumbar region of the 
region of the spinal cord 
spinal cord 
Ganglia (the 2nd neuron) 
In the tissue of effector organs Near the spinal cord 
or near it 
 
CHOLINERGIC SYNAPSE 
 
The nerve endings of postganglionic parasympathetic nerves release a neuro-
transmitter acetylcholine (fig. 5.1). Such synapses are named cholinergic synapses. 

Chapter 5.  СHOLINERGIC AGONISTS 
45
O 
H3C 
CH3 
H3C 
O 
N+ 
CH3 
  
Fig. 5.1. Structure of acetylcholine 
 
Each synapse contains a presynaptic membrane, a synaptic gap (cleft), and a post-
synaptic membrane with cholinergic receptors (fig. 5.2). Acetylcholine is synthesized 
in the presynaptic part of the nerve ending. It is deposited in vesicles, releases into the 
synaptic gap, and interacts with cholinoreceptors on the postsynaptic membrane. 
Acetylcholinesterase produces degradation of the neurotransmitter in the synaptic gap. 
Choline is taken up by the neuron and used for the synthesis of acetylcholine. 
 
 
Mitochondrion 
 
 
Acetyl-SCoA 
CoA 
 
A 
Acetylcholine 
Presynaptic 
Ch 
Ch 
A 
Synaptic vesticle 
neuron 
Ch 
 
 
Synaptic Knob 
Choline 
Ch 
A 
Acetate 
A 
Ch 
Acetylcholinesterase 
ACh receptor 
 
 
 
 
 
Synaptic Cleft 
 
Postsynaptic  
 
 
Fig. 5.2. Structure and function of cholinergic synapse (http://images.yandex.ru). 

46 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
CHOLINORECEPTORS 
 
There are two types of cholinergic receptors: 
– M-cholinoreceptors (muscarinic) with subtypes M1, M2, M3, M4, M5 
– N-cholinoreceptors (muscarinic) with neuronal and muscular subtypes. 
 
Cholinoreceptors are located in different organs and tissues , but some of these 
 
tissues are characterized by prevalence of M- or N-cholinergic receptors (table 
5.2). Table 5.2. Location of cholinergic receptors 
M-cholinoreceptors 
N-cholinoreceptors 
CNS 
CNS 
Eye 
Adrenal medulla 
Heart 
Carotid glomerulus 
Blood vessels 
Sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia 
Bronchi (smooth muscles, glands) 
Skeletal muscles 
Gut (smooth muscles, glands) 
Urinary bladder 
Uterus 
Sweat glands 
 
CHOLINERGIC DRUGS 
 
Cholinergic drugs are preparations acting on cholinergic neurotransmission. 
They are divided into cholinergic agonists (= cholinomimetics, cholino-positive 
drugs) and cholinergic antagonists (= cholinoblockers, cholino-negative drugs) 
(fig. 
5.3). 
Cholinomimetics 
increase 
cholinergic 
neurotransmission. 
Cholinoblockers decrease cholinergic neurotransmission. 
 
 
 
CHOLINERGIC 
 
DRUGS 
 
 
 
 
CHOLINOMIMETICS 
 
 cholinergic processes 
 
 
 
 
CHOLINOBLOCKERS 
 
 cholinergic processes 
 
Fig. 5.3. Cholinergic drugs. 

Chapter 5.  СHOLINERGIC AGONISTS 
47
 
CHOLINOMIMETICS 
 
Classification 
 
 
M-,N-cholinomimetics 
 
 
Direct-acting 
 
–  Acetylcholine 
 
–  Carbachol (Carbocholinum) 
 
 
Indirect-acting (anticholinesterases) 
 
–  Neostigmine (Proserinum) 
 
–  Physostigmine 
 
–  Pyridostigmine 
 
–  Galanthamine hydrobromide 
 
–  Isoflurophate 
 
M-cholinomimetics 
 
–  Pilocarpine hydrochloride 
 
N-cholinomimetics 
 
–  Cytitonum 
 
–  Lobeline hydrochloride. 
 
DRUGS WITH M-CHOLINOMIMETIC EFFECTS 
 
Carbahol, pilocarpine, and anticholinesterases have clinically significant M-
cholinomimetic activity and indications grounded on such activity (table 5.3). 
 
Table 5.3. Pharmacodynamics and indications 
 
for M-,N- and M-cholinomimetics 
 
M-cholinomimetic effects 
Indications 
Miosis (constriction of eye pupils) 
Glaucoma 
Spasm of accommodation 
(regulation of eye lens for near vision) 
A decrease in intra-eye pressure 
Stimulation of glands secretion 
Xerostomia 
An increase in salivation 
An increase in smooth muscles tone 
Atonia of the intestine and urinary bladder 
after surgeries 
Bradycardia 
Arrhythmia 
Blood vessels dilation 
 
Side-effects 
  
 
Hypersalivation 
 
 
Pain in the abdomen 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Diarrhea 
 
 
Spasm of bronchi 
 
 
Bradycardia 
 
 
Frequent urination 
 
 
Sweatiness. 
 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Carbachol (Carbacholinum) has the chemical structure similar to 
acetylcholine, but is not destroyed by cholinesterases; is direct acting M-, N-
cholinomimetic with the prevalence of M-cholinergic activity; now is applied 
topically for the treatment of glaucoma (eye drops). 
 
Pilocarpine is an alkaloid from Pilocarpus pinnatifolius (fig. 5.4), is a M-
cholinomimetic; has strong systemic M -cholinomimetic activity, but is toxic; 
nowadays is used only for the treatment of glaucoma (eye drops, eye ointment, or 
eye membranes), seldom is used in xerostomia. 
 
Aceclidinum is a synthetic preparation; is administered SC, IM, or topically (eye 
drops); is not toxic; does not penetrate CNS; is M-cholinomimetic; is used for the 
treatment of atonia of the intestine and urinary bladder, as well as for glaucoma. 
 
ANTICHOLINESTERASES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.4. Pilocarpus pinnatifolius containing pilocarpine 

Chapter 5.  СHOLINERGIC AGONISTS 
49
 
Anticholinesterases are indirect-acting M-, N-cholinomimetics with a 
reversible or irreversible type of action. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Anticholinesterases bind to acetylcholinesterase in the synaptic gap, inhibit it 
and decrease acetylcholine destruction. 
 
The result is the accumulation of the acetylcholine amount in the synaptic gap 
and an increase in acetylcholine interaction with M- and N-cholinoreceptors (fig. 5.5). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
all M-cholinomimetic effects on internal organs (similar to those of 
carba-chol and pilocarpine) 
 
an increase in neuromuscular transmission resulting from the 
accumulation of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction. 
Side-effects 
 
 
 
A 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
acetylcholine 
  acetylcholinesterase           
  receptor 
  
Fig. 5.5. Mechanism of action of anticholinesterases (http://www.picsearch.com). 

50 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
They are the same as the side-effects of direct M-,N- and M-cholinomimetics. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Physostigmine is an alkaloid from Phyzostigma venenosum (fig. 5.6); is well 
absorbed; penetrates CNS; has a reversible anticholinesterase action; is used for 
the treatment of glaucoma, intoxication by atropine, cholinoblockers, and tricyclic 
antidepressants, early stages of Alzheimer’s disease; is toxic. 
 
Galantamine is an alkaloid from Phyzostigma venenosum (fig. 5.6); is adminis-
tered SC, IM; penetrates into CNS; has a reversible anticholinesterase action; is used 
for the treatment of paralysis, neuritis, early stages of Alzheimer’s disease and other 
neurological diseases; is not used in glaucoma due to its irritative action. 
 
Neostigmine is a synthetic preparation; is administered orally, SC, IV, topi-
cally (eye drops); does not penetrate CNS; has a reversible anticholinesterase 
action (4-6 hrs); is used for paralysis, neuritis, myasthenia gravis, atonia of the 
intestine and urinary bladder, some kinds of arrhythmia, glaucoma, poisoning with 
atropine, overdose of tubocurarine; may be used for stimulation of labor activity; 
in dentistry is applied for xerostomia; is less toxic than physostigmine. 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.6. Medicinal plants containing anticholinesterases: 
 
A – Phyzostigma venenosum; B – Galanthus Woronowi. 

Chapter 5.  СHOLINERGIC AGONISTS 
51
 
Pyridostigmine acts longer, but is less potent than neostigmine; is used orally 
for the treatment of neurological diseases and myasthenia gravis. 
 
Phosphacolum is an irreversibly acting anticholinesterase with long-lasting 
action; is toxic and used only for glaucoma (eye drops). 
 
Acute poisoning with organophosphates 
 
(irreversible anticholinesterases) 
 
Signs: 
 
–  hypersalivation 
 
–  nausea, vomiting 
 
–  spasm of bronchi, edema of the lungs 
 
–  convulsions 
 
–  unconcsiousness 
 
–  Reactivators of cholinesterase (dipyroxim, alloxim, izonitrozin), IM. 
 
–  Atropine, IM. 
 
N-CHOLINOMIMETICS 
 
N-cholinomimetics are cholinergic agonists stimulating N-cholinoreceptors. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
They stimulate N-cholinoreceptors in zona carotis and initiate a reflexive in-
crease in the activity of the respiratory and vasomotor centers resulting in the short 
stimulation of breathing and elevation of BP. 
 
They also stimulate N-cholinoreceptors in the adrenal medulla, increase the 
secretion of epinephrine, which causes vasoconstriction and the elevation of BP 
(fig. 5.7). 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Cytitonum is the name of a cytizine solution; is administered IV, acts 3-5 
min; stimulates N-cholinoreceptors; reflexly stimulates respiration and increases 
BP; is used for emergency help in respiratory arrest and collapse; is an ingredient 
of com-bined tablets against tobacco abuse. 
 
Lobeline is an alkaloid; is administered IV and acts during 3-5 min; the mecha-
nism of action is similar to Cytitonum; is used for emergency help in the respiratory 
arrest, asphyxia, asphyxia of newborns; is used to treat tobacco abuse in the form of 
combined tablets “Lobesil”; is not used for collapse due to its ability to provoke 
transitory a decrease in BP resulting from the stimulation of n.vagus center. 

52 
PHARMACOLOGY. V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
Zona 
 Brain 
 Respiration 
carotis 
medulla 
 
 
 
 
 
DRUGS 
Adrenal 
 BP 
medulla 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.7. Mechanism of action of N-cholinomimetics. 
 
NICOTINE 
 
It is a tobacco alkaloid with a dose-dependent action on N-cholinoreceptors. 
Effects of nicotine are manifested in tobacco smoking. Nicotine causes 
dependence that leads to abuse of tobacco and results in the development of 
cardiovascular and lungs pathology. 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Cholinomimetics may cause all the following side-effects, except: 
 
 
Bradycardia 
 
 
Bronchospasm 
 
 
Salivation 
 
 
Constipation and urinary retention 
 
 
Sweating. 
 
№2. Only one preparation is N-cholinomimetic: 
 
 
Carbochol 
 
 
Lobeline 
 
 
Neostigmine 

Chapter 5.  СHOLINERGIC AGONISTS 
53
 
 
Aceclidinum 
 
 
Pilocarpine. 
 
№3. Anticholinesterases are used for the treatment of: 
 
 
Atropine (belladonna) poisoning 
 
 
Postoperative paralytic ileus (atony of intestines) 
 
 
Overdose of depolarizing myorelaxants 
 
 
Myasthenia gravis 
 
 
Glaucoma. 
 
№4. N-cholinomimetics: 
 
 
Are stimulants of respiration 
 
 
Are drugs for emergency help 
 
 
Have long duration of action 
 
 
Are used for the treatment of glaucoma and atony of the GI tract 
 
 
Are drugs for relief of tobacco smoking. 
 
№5. In the complex treatment of a child suffering from cerebral palsy, the 
doctor decided to include anticholinesterase drug penetrating CNS and 
moderately improving mental development. Choose this drug. 
 
 
Phosphacol 
 
 
Neostigmine (Proserinum) 
 
 
Galanthamine 
 
 
Pilocarpine 
 
 
Cytitonum. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – D; № 2 – B; № 3 – A, B, D, E; № 4 – A, B, E; № 5 – C. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHOLINERGIC 
 
ANTAGONISTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANTICHOLINERGIC DRUGS 
 
Cholinergic antagonists are also called cholinergic blockers. They bind to 
cholinoreceptors, but do not trigger the usual receptor-mediated intracellular effects. 
These drugs are divided into two groups: M-cholinoblockers (antimuscarinic agents) 
and N-cholinoblockers (ganglionic blockers and neuromuscular blockers (fig. 6.1). 
 
 
CHOLINERGIC ANTAGONISTS 
 
 
 
M-cholinoblockers 
N-cholinoblockers 
(antimuscarinic agents) 
Neuromuscular blockers 
Ganglionic 
(myorelaxants) 
blockers 
 
 
Fig. 6.1. Groups of cholinergic antagonists. 

Chapter 6.  CHOLINERGIC ANTAGONISTS 
55
 
M-CHOLINOBLOCKLERS 
 
M-cholinoblockers are the drugs which block neurotransmission in the mus-
carinic synapses of the parasympathetic nerves and decrease the effects of 
parasym-pathetic innervation. They also block M-cholinoreceptors in sympathetic 
neurons innervating sweat glands. 
 
Classification 
 
A. Non-selective 
 
1. Natural agents 
 
–   Atropine sulfate 
 
–   Hyoscine (Scopolamine hydrobromide) 
 
–   Platyphylline hydrotartrate 
 
–   Belldoonna dry extract 
 
 
Synthetic and semisynthetic agents 
 
–   Butylscopolamine (buscopan) 
 
–   Prifinium bromide (riabal) 
 
–   Ipratropium bromide (Atrovent) 
 
–   Tropicamide 
 
B. Selective 
 
–  Pirenzepine (Gastrocepine). 
 
ATROPINE SULFATE 
 
Atropine is an alkaloid, tropine derivative (fig. 6.2). It is water- and alcohol 
soluble. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.2. Chemical structure of atropine. 

56 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
Atropine is contained in such medicinal plants as Atropa Belladonna (deadly 
nightshade), Hyoscianus niger, Datura stramonium (fig. 6.3). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.3. Atropa Belladonna containing atropine. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, IM, SC; is applied topically (eye drops) 
 
 
is rapidly, but poorly absorbed in the gut 
 
 
binds to plasma proteins (18%) 
 
 
penetrates CNS and placenta 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver by atropinase 
 
 
is excreted with urine 
 
 
has T ½ = 2 hrs; acts on internal organs during 4 hrs; influences eye 
tissues during 7-10 days after instillation into the conjunctival sack. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Atropine competes reversibly with acetylcholine at M-cholinoreceptor. 
 
 
It binds to receptors and prevents binding of acetylcholine to these sites 
 
(fig. 6.4). 
 
 
Atropine has a non-selective action: it interacts with all the subtypes of 
M-cholinoreceptors. 
 
Atropine is both a central and peripheral muscarinic blocker. 

Chapter 6.  CHOLINERGIC ANTAGONISTS 
57
 
 
 
 
A 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acetylcholine = black points 
Atropine = grey points 
 
Fig. 6.4. Mechanism of action of atropine: A –normal condition of cholinergic synapse; B – 
synapse condition in the presence of atropine (http://www.picsearch.com). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
weak local anesthesia in the site of application 
 
 
in CNS: therapeutic doses – a sedation and antiparkinsonian effect; large 
doses – excitation, hallucinations, and coma 
 
 
in the eye: dilatation of pupil (midriasis), inability to focus for near vision (= 
cycloplegia, paralysis of accomodation), an increase of intraocular pressure 
 
in the cardiovascular system: therapeutic doses – tachycardia, no effect on BP 
 
 
in the respiratory system: dilation of bronchi and a decrease in the 
secretion of bronchial glands 
 
 
in the gut: reducing of the secretion of saliva and gastric juice, a decrease 
in the tone and motility; antispasmotic activity 
 
 
in the urinary system: relaxation of the smooth muscles of the urinary 
blad-der and urinary pathways 
 
 
the inhibition of sweat secretion 
 
 
antidote properties in acute poisonings with M-cholinomimetics, anti-
cholinesterases and toxic mushrooms containing muscarine; reducing of the 
vagal action of morphine and some adverse effects of general anesthetics. 
 
Indications 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Trauma of the eye, inflammation in the eye (cycloplegia and midriasis are 
“pharmacological bandage” producing eye immobilization) 
 
 
Diagnostics of eye diseases, the measurement of refraction for the correct 
selection of glasses 
 
 
Bradycardia, AV block 
 
 
Hypersalivation 
 
 
Gastric ulcer 
 
 
Acute pancreatitis 
 
 
Cholecystitis 
 
 
Billiary or renal colic 
 
 
Enuresis 
 
 
Premedication 
 
 
Acute poisoning with muscarine-containing mushrooms, M-
cholinomimetics, anticholinesterases, or morphine. 
 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Dilated pupils resulting in photo-
phobia 
 
Blurred vision 
 
 
An increase in intraocular pressure, 
an attack of glaucoma in someone 
with latent condition 
 
Tachycardia 
 
 
Dry mouth 
 
 
Constipation 
 
 
Retention of urine 
 
 
Flushed skin 
 
 
A rise in body temperature. 
 
Contraindications 
 
 
Glaucoma 
 
 
Tachycardia, taciarrhythmia 
 
 
Atonia of the GI tract, 
achalasia, ulcerative colitis 
 
Prostate hyperplasia, adenoma of 
prostate 
 
Hepatic insufficiency 
 
 
Hyperthyroidism 
 
 
High body temperature 
 
 
Toxicosis of pregnancy 
 
 
Cerebral pathology in children 
 
 
Childhood or old age. 
 
 
Acute poisoning with atropine 
 
Signs: 
 
–– restlessness, disorientation, hallucinations, delirium, coma 
 
–– midriasis, absence of pupils’ reaction to the light 
 
–– dryness of the skin and mucous membranes 
 
–– dysphagia 
 
–– retention of urine 

Chapter 6.  CHOLINERGIC ANTAGONISTS 
59
 
–– hyperemia of the skin 
 
–– elevated body temperature. 
 
Emergency help: 
 
–– neostigmine or other anticholinesterases (as an antidote); they cause ac-
cumulation of acetylcholine in synapses that results in the liberation of 
receptors from atropine 
 
–– chlorpromazine (to decrease psychotic disorders) 
 
–– barbiturates (to decrease seizures). 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Scopolamine is another alkaloid contained in Atropa Belladonna and 
Scopolia. It has pharmacokinetics and peripheral effects similar to atropine; the 
central action is greater and longer than that of atropine; inhibits activity of VIII 
pair of cranial nerves and decreases motion sickness, produces sedation and short-
memory block-ing, has antiparkinsonian effect; has a strong and short (5-6 hrs) 
action on the eye; is used for the prevention and treatment of motion sickness, for 
the complex therapy of psychic diseases, Parkinson’s disease, for premedication; 
has side-effects similar to those of atropine. 
 
Platyphylline is an alkaloid from Senecio platyphylus; has the central action 
less than that of atropine; has a short (5-6 hrs) action on the eye; causes inhibition 
of the vasomotor center and a direct myotropic action on blood vessels, that’s why 
dilates blood vessels and lowers BP; may be used to treat spasms of cerebral and 
coronary blood vessels, as well as to treat hypertension. 
 
Preparations of Belladonna (extracts, tinctures) are used as antispasmodic and 
analgesic agents for stomach ulcer, cholelithiasis and other diseases accompanied by 
spasms of smooth muscles of the abdominal cavity organs, bradycardia due to over-
excitation of n. vagus nerve. They are the ingredients of some combined preparations. 
 
Butylscopolamine is a semisynthetic derivative of scopolamine which does 
not penetrate blood-brain barrier and has not central action. It is used to treat 
crampy abdominal pain, esophageal spasms, renal colic, and bladder spasms. The 
drug is effective in reducing the duration of the first stage of labor. Side effects 
may include sleepiness, vision changes, triggering of glaucoma, and allergy. 
 
Prifinium bromide (riabal) is slowly absorbed into the gut and quickly ex-creted; 
blocks peripheral M-cholinoreceptors in the GI tract that leads to inhibition of acid 
secretion and peptic activity of gastric juice; reduces the exocrine activity of the 
pancreas, the tone of the smooth muscles of the gut, normalizes the peristalsis of the 
stomach, corrects increased motor activity of the GI tract. The drug is used 

60 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
in nausea and vomiting caused by functional spasms in infants, abdominal pain 
syndrome with functional disorders of the colon; spasms of smooth muscles of the 
gastrointestinal tract. Side effects are dry mouth, mydriasis, disturbances of 
accom-modation, drowsiness. 
 
Ipratropium bromide is quaternary derivative of atropine, non-selective M-
cholinoblocker in the form of aerosol; is not absorbed in lungs and acts on M-
cholinoreceptors only in bronchi; dilates bronchi; is used for prevention of bron-
chial asthma attack; has not significant side effects (may cause unpleasant taste). 
 
Pirenzepine is selective M1-cholinoblocker inhibiting gastric secretion; is ad-
ministered orally, IM, IV; produces maximal concentration in blood plasma in 2-3 hrs 
after oral administration; has a half-life of 10-12 hrs; does not penetrate CNS and 
placenta; is used for treatment of ulcer of stomach and duodenum, Zollinger-Ellison’s 
syndrome, prevention of peptic ulcers caused by stress; may cause dry mouth, blurred 
vision, retention of urine but side effects are minimal in comparison with atropine. 
 
Tropicamide blocks the M-cholinoreceptors of the sphincter in the iris and cili-
ary muscle, causing short-term mydriasis and accommodation paralysisis; is used in 
ophthalmology for examination of the ocular fundus, investigation of refraction, as 
well as in inflammatory processes of the eye. It is applied as eye drops. 
 
N-CHOLINOBLOCKERS 
 
N-cholinoblockers are the drugs, which block neurotransmission in the 
nicotinic synapses in ganglia or in skeletal muscles. 
 
GANGLIONIC BLOCKERS 
 
Ganglionic blockers are preparations which block N-cholinorecepors in ganglia. 
 
Classification 
 
 
Quaternary amines 
 
–  Hexamethonium (Benzohexonium) 
 
–  Hygronium 
 
–  Pentamine 
 
 
Tertiary amines 
 
–  Pachycarpine hydroiodide 
 
–  Pirilenum. 
 
HEXAMETHONIUM 

Chapter 6.  CHOLINERGIC ANTAGONISTS 
61
 
It is a synthetic compound containing quaternary nitrogen. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered IM, IV, and orally 
 
 
is poorly aborbed in the GI tract 
 
 
does not penetrate CNS 
 
 
acts during 3-4 hrs. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
The drug blocks N-cholinoreceptors in sympathetic and parasympathetic 
ganglia and disturbs the autonomic regulation of internal organs (pharma-
cological denervation) (fig. 6.5). 
 
 
It inhibits the propagation of the nervous impulses running to effector 
organs along both sympathetic and parasympathetic fibres. 
 
The main result of sympathetic ganglia blockade is a decrease of BP. 
 
 
The blockade of parasympathetic ganglia is manifested by sympatholytic 
and antisecretory effects. 
 
Under these conditions sensitivity of effector organs to humoral stimuli 
stays normal or is increased. 
  
GANGLIONIC 
 
BLOCKERS 
 
 
 
SYMPATHETIC 
PARASYMPATHETIC 
 
GANGLIA 
GANGLIA 
 
 
EFFECTOR 
 
ORGANS 
 
 
 
Pharmacological 
 
denervation 
 
Fig. 6.5. Mechanism of action of ganglionic blockers. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
the dilation of blood vessels, redistribution of blood in the body, lowering 
of BP 
 
the dilation of bronchi 
 
 
a decrease in secretion and motility of the bowels, spasmolytic action 
 
 
a decrease in the tone of the urinary bladder and urinary pathways 
 
 
an increase in the sensitivity of myometrium to oxytocin resulting in the 
stimulation of uterus contractions in the labor 
 
a decrease in sweat secretion 
 
 
changes in intraocular pressure which depends on the type of glaucoma. 
 
 
Indications 
 
 
Hypertensive emergence 
 
 
Hypertension (rarely) 
 
 
Controlled hypotension in surgeries 
 
 
Edema of the lungs 
 
 
Edema of the brain 
 
 
Bronchial asthma attack 
 
 
Colic 
 
 
Ulcer of the stomach (rarely). 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Hypotension 
1. Hypotension, collapse 
2. Orthostatic collapse (postural 
2. Severe atherosclerosis 
hypotension) 
3. Closed-angle glaucoma 
3. Dry mouth 
4. Atony of the gut 
4. Constipation 
5. Adenome of prostate 
5. Retention of urination 
6. Severe diseases of the heart, 
6. An increase of intraocular pressure in 
liver, and kidney. 
patients with closed-angle glaucoma. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Hygronium is a short-acting potent ganglia blocker; is administered only by 
IV infusion; is used for controlled hypotension in surgeries, edema of the lungs, 
edema of the brain, severe hypertensive crisis, for the control of BP in patients 
with aortha anevrism emergence. 
 
Pentamine is less potent than hexamethonium, acts during 1,5 hrs, is admi- 
nistered IV, IM for emergency help in acute hypertension, a bronchial asthma 
attack, colic, as well as for controlled hypotension in surgeries. 

Chapter 6.  CHOLINERGIC ANTAGONISTS 
63
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.6. Sophora pachycarpa containing pachycarpine. 
 
Pirilenum is a synthetic preparation with the structure of tertiary amine, that’s 
why is taken by mouth, is well absorbed in the gut, penetrates CNS, acts during 6-8 
hrs; is used to treat gangliolitis, spasms of peripheral blood vessels, bronchial asthma, 
gastric ulcer (rarely); has side-effects similar to that of hexamethonium. 
Pachycarpine is an alkaloid from Sophora pachycarpa (fig. 6.6); is 
administered orally, IM, SC; penetrates CNS, acts during 8-12 hrs; is a ganglia 
blocker, stimulates uterus contractions, improves functions of skeletal muscles; is 
used to treat gangl-iolitis, spasms of blood vessels, nervous diseases, myopathy, 
may be used for the stimulation of the labor activity; has high toxicity. 
 
MYORELAXANTS 
 
Myorelaxants (neoromuscular blockers) are cholinergic drugs which 
interfere with the transmission of nervous impulses in the synapses of skeletal 
muscles caus-ing their relaxation. 
 
Classification 
 
 
Non-depolarizing agents 
 
–  d-Tubocurarine chloride 
 
–  Pancuronium bromide 
 
–  Pipecuronium bromide 
 
–  Rocuronium bromide 
 
 
Depolarizing agents 

64 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Succinylcholine (Dithylinum). 
 
TUBOCURARINE 
 
Tubocurarine is an alkaloid from a plant-derived arrow poison of South 
American natives. It contains two quaternary nitrogen atoms which are common to 
all other muscle relaxants (fig. 6.7). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.7. Chemical structure of d-tubocurarine. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered IV 
 
is not absorbed in the gut due to the presence of quaternary nitrogen atoms 
 
 
does not penetrate CNS 
 
total myorelaxation develops in 20-30 min and lasts about 20-40 min which needs 
artificial lungs ventilation, restoration of the muscle tone lasts 20-30 min. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
It binds to endplate N-cholinoreceptors without exciting them and acts as 
a competitive antagonist towards acetylcholine. 
 
It blocks neuromuscular transmission by the prevention of acetylcholine 
binding to such nicotinic receptors (fig. 6.8). 

Chapter 6.  CHOLINERGIC ANTAGONISTS 
65
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blockade of ACh receptors 
 
No depolarization of 
 
endplate 
 
Fig. 6.8. Mechanism of action of d-tubocurarine (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
muscular paralysis which occurres firstly in the muscles of fingers, neck, 
face, extremities, trunk, then in intercostal muscles, and the diaphragm 
(with the inability to breath). 
 
Indications 
 
 
myorelaxation under the conditions of general anesthesia 
 
seizures caused by seizure poisons and some infections. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Spasm of bronchi and urticaria (due to histamine release from mast cells) 
 
 
Lowering of BP (due to weak ganglia blocking activity). 
 
Contraindications 
 
Myasthenia gravis, bronchial asthma, childhood. 
 
Decurarization 
 
The duration of the action of d-tubocurarine can be shortened by the adminis-
tration of neostigmine. Inhibition of acetylcholine esterase causes the concentration of 
acetylcholine released at the endplate to rise. Competitive “displacement” by 
acetylcholine of tubocurarine from the receptors allows transmission to be restored. 

66 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER 
 
NON-DEPOLARIZING MYORELAXANTS 
 
Pancuronium is a synthetic compound, is more potent than tubocuracine, has a 
longer duration of action, does not cause release of histamine or ganglionic blockade, 
may cause an increased heart rate and BP (due to blockade of M2 cardiac receptors). 
 
Pipecuronium is similar to pancuronium, does not cause tachycardia and an 
increase of BP. 
 
Rokuronium is an antagonist of n-cholinergic receptors of skeletal musculs; 
inhibits neuromuscular transmission and causes myorelaxation, has weak 
vagolytic effect, does not affect the release of histamine. The duration of the effect 
is 22 min in adults. 
 
SUCCINYLCHOLINE 
 
 
Succinylcholine 
 
 
 
 
Contraction 
 
Succinylcholine not degraded 
 
by acetylcholine esterases 
 
 
 
 
 
Persistent depolarization of end plate 
 
 
 
New AP and contraction 
 
cannot be elicited 
 
 
Fig. 6.9. Mechanism of action of succinylcholine (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 

Chapter 6.  CHOLINERGIC ANTAGONISTS 
67
 
 
is a double acetylcholine molecule 
 
 
is administered IV; has a short duration of action (total myorelaxation 
and stop of breathing lasts 3-5 min) and does not need artificial lungs 
ventila-tion; is destroyed by butiryl cholinesrerase in blood 
 
 
like acetylcholine, acts on endplate N-cholinoreceptors, stimulates them, and 
causes depolarization of postsynaptic membrane; degradates more slowly 
than acetylcholine and therefore remains in the synaptic gap for several 
minutes, causing the endplate depolarization of corresponding duration. This 
depolarization triggers a propagated action potential (AP). A new AP can be 
elicited at the endplate only if the membrane has been repolarized, that’s why 
skeletal muscles stay without new nerve impulses and are relaxed (fig. 6.9). 
The order of myorelaxation is the same as for tubocurarine 
 
 
is used in short surgeries, intubation of thrachea, endoscopy, reposition 
of bone fractures 
 
may cause fibrillation of skeletal muscles at the start of action, hyper-
kalemia, cardiac arrhythmia, an increase of intraocular pressure, pain in 
skeletal muscles after the surgery, long-lasting apnoea in patients 
deficient on butiryl cholinesterase (in this case emergency help is 
hemotransfusion and artificial lungs ventilation). 
 
In clinic they also use centrally acting muscle relaxants. These agents lower 
muscle tone by augmenting the activity of intraspinal inhibitory neurons. They are 
used in the treatment of painful muscle spasms, e.g. in spinal disorders. 
Benzodiazepines enhance the effectiveness of the inhibitory transmitter GABA at 
GABAA receptors. Baclofen stimulates GABAB receptors. Clonidine acts pesynapti-
cally on α2-adrenoceptors and inhibits release of exitatory aminoacid transmitters. 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Succinylcholine (Dithylinum): 
 
Is depolarizing myorelaxant 
 
Has short duration of action 
 
May cause lasting apnoea in some patients 
 
Is suitable for short surgeries 
 
All the listed. 
 
№2. Ganglionic blockers: 
 
Block N-cholinoreceptors in parasympathetic ganglia 
 
Block N-cholinoreceptors in sympathetic ganglia 
 
Block N-cholinoreceptors in skeletal muscles 
 
Block N-cholinoreceptors in CNS 

E.  Block N-cholinoreceptors both in parasympathetic and sympathetic ganglia. 
 
№3. Indications to the use of atropine are: 
 
Gastric ulcer 
 
Colic 
 
Atonia of the gut after the surgery 
 
Bradycardia 
 
Preanesthetic medication. 
 
№4. The true statements concerning M-cholinoblockers are: 
 
Atropine is used to treat glaucoma 
 
Scopolamine is used in motion sickness 
 
Plathyphylline dilates blood vessels and lowers BP 
 
Pirenzepine is for the treatment of gastric ulcer 
 
Pirenzepine is for the treatment and diagnostics of eye diseases. 
 
№5. The administration of ipratropium in patients with bronchial asthma is 
not accompanied by numerous side-effects which are characteristic for 
atropine and other M-cholinoblckers due to: 
 
The inability to penetrate through the blood brain barrier 
 
The inhibition of M-cholinoreceptors in the bronchi only 
 
The inhibition of all the types of M-cholinoreceptors 
 
The inhibition of cholinesterase 
 
Significant protein binding. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – E; № 2 – E; № 3 – A, B, D, E; № 4 –B, C, D; № 5 – B. 

Chapter 7.  ADRENERGIC AGONISTS 
69
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADRENERGIC 
 
AGONISTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 
The sympathetic nervous system is a section of the autonomic nervous 
system. Centers of SANS are located in thoraco-lumbar segments of the spinal 
cord (the 1st neuron). Ganglia of SANS are located near the spinal cord and form 
Truncus sympathycus (the 2nd nueron). The neurotransmitter released by 
sympathetic nerve endings is norepinephrine (= noradrenaline) (fig. 7.1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7.1. Chemical structure of norepinephrine. 

70 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
ADRENERGIC SYNAPSE 
 
Synapses, in which norepinephrine is the neurotransmitter are named 
adrenergic synapses (fig. 7.2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7.2. Adrenergic synapse and its function (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Norepinephrine is synthesized in the presynaptic part of the neuron. It is 
depos-ited in vesicles. Non-storaged neurotransmitter is destroyed by monoamine 
oxidase (MAO). When the nerve impulse arrives, norepinephrine is liberated into 
the synaptic gap. It interacts with receptors on the presynaptic and postsynaptic 
membranes. Binding to presynaptic receptors terminates the release of the 
neurotransmitter. In synaptic gap 20% of norepinephrine is degradated by 
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). Another part of neurotransmitter (80%) is 
re-uptaken by the presynaptic membrane. 
 
ADRENOCEPTORS 
 
There are two types of adrenoceptors and some subtypes in each family (fig.7.3). 
 
They are located in CNS, as well as in many peripheral tissues (table 7.1). 

Chapter 7.  ADRENERGIC AGONISTS 
71
 
 
 
RECEPTOR 
 
 
 
 
α 
β 
 
 
 
α
1 
α
2 
β
1 
β
2 
β
3 
Fig. 7.3. Types and subtypes of adrenoceptors. 
 
Table 7.1. Localization and main effects of adrenoceptors 
 
Receptor 
Localization 
Effects 
α1 
Blood vessels 
Constriction,  of blood pressure 
Spleen 
Constriction 
Eye 
Mydriasis 
Urine bladder 
 of sphincter closure 
α2 
Blood vessels 
Constriction 
Pancreas 
 of insulin release 
All adrenergic synapses 
 of norepinephrine release 
β1 
Heart 
 of rate and contractility 
Fat tissue 
 of lipolysis 
β2 
Blood vessels 
Vasodilation 
Bronchi 
Dilation 
Uterus 
Relaxation 
Pancreas 
 of glucagon’s release 
Liver 
 of glycogenolysis 
Skeletal muscles 
 of glycogenolysis 
β3 
Pancreas 
 of insulin secretion 
Fat tissue 
 of lipolysis 
Mast cells 
 of degranulation 
 of release of allergy mediators 

72 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
ADRENERGIC DRUGS 
 
Drugs acting on adrenergic synapses are named adrenergic drugs. They are 
divided into two groups: adrenergic agonists and adrenergic antagonists 
(adreno-blockers and sympatholytics) – fig.7.4. 
 
Adrenergic agonists are also named adrenopositive drugs or adrenomimetics. 
Adrenergic antagonists are also named adrenonegative agents. Among them there 
are substances inhibiting adrenergic receptors (adrenoblockers) and substances 
 
influencing the store and re-uptake of norepinephrine (sympatholytics). 
 
 
 
ADRENERGIC DRUGS 
 
 
 
 
ADRENERGIC AGONISTS 
 
 adrenergic processes 
 
 
 
 
ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISTS 
 
 adrenergic processes 
 
Fig. 7.4. Drugs influencing adrenergic synapses. 
 
ADRENERGIC AGONISTS 
 
Adrenergic agonists are drugs stimulating adrenergic 
neurotransmission. Classification 
 
 
α-, β-adrenomimetics 
 
 
Direct-acting 
 
–   Adrenaline hydrochloride (Epinephrine) 
 
 
Indirect-acting 
 
–   Ephedrine hydrochloride 
 
 
α-adrenomimetics 
 
 
Non-selective 
 
–   Noradrenaline hydrotartrate (α1, α2 > β) 
 
Selective 
 
–   Phenylephrine (Mesatonum) (α1) 
–   Naphazoline (Naphthyzinum) (α2) 
–   Halazolin (Xylometazoline) (α2) 
 
β- adrenomimetics 

Chapter 7.  ADRENERGIC AGONISTS 
73
 
 
Non-selective 
 
–   Isoprenaline (Isadrinum) (β1, β2) 
 
Selective 
 
–   Dobutamine (β1) 
–   Salbutamol (Albuterol) (β2) 
–   Fenoterol (β2) 
 
ADRENALINE 
 
It is a catecholamine, the hormone produced by the adrenal medulla. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered SC, IV (rarely), intracardially (in the heart arrest), or topically 
 
 
is destroyed in the GI tract, that’s why is not administered orally 
 
 
does not penetrate CNS 
 
 
is biotransformed by enzymes in blood 
 
 
acts during 15 min on intern organs and during 30 min on metabolic 
proc-esses. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Adrenaline acts by the stimulation of all the types of adrenoceptors. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
Indications 
 
An increase in automaticity, conductivity, and Heart arrest 
contractility of the heart 
 
Constriction of blood vessels 
 
 
Elevation of blood 
pressure Bronchodilation 
An increase in glucose concentration in blood 
 
Inhibition of allergy 
 
Mydriasis 
A decrease in intra-eye pressure. 
 
Prolongation of local anethesia Acute 
inflammation of the mucous membrane 
of the nose or the eye 
 
Shock, collapse 
 
Bronchial asthma attack 
 
Hypoglycemic coma 
 
Anaphylactic shock 
 
Pupil dilatation. 
Open-angle glaucoma. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 Excitement, tremor 
 
 Hypertension 
 
 Arrhythmia 
 
 Hyperglycemia. 

74 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Contraindications 
 
Hypertension, severe atherosclerosis, heart arrhythmia, diabetes mellitus, 
hyperthyroidism 
 
EPHEDRINE 
 
The drug is not a catecholamine by its structure (fig. 7.5). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7.5. Chemical structure of ephedrine. 
 
It is an alkaloid from Ephedra equisetica (fig. 7.6). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7.6. Ephedra equisetica containing ephedrine. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, SC, IM, IV, or topically 
 
 
is absorbed in the GI tract 
 
 
penetrates CNS 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver 
 
 
is excreted by the kidney 
 
 
acts during 4-6 hrs. 

Chapter 7.  ADRENERGIC AGONISTS 
75
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Ephedrine stimulates the release of noradrenaline, inhibits the re-uptake of 
noradrenaline (indirect action) (fig. 7.7). 
 
It has a weak direct action on adrenoceptors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7.7. Mechanism of ephedrine’s action 
 
(adapted from R.Finkel et al., 2008). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
the stimulation of CNS, an increase in the ability to mental and physical 
work, euphoria 
 
the stimulation of the heart function 
 
 
vasoconstriction 
 
 
the elevation of BP 
 
 
the dilation of bronchi 
 
 
the inhibition of the gut motility 
 
 
the retention of urine 
 
 
mydriasis. 

76 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Indications 
 
 
Shock, collapse 
 
Anaphylactic shock 
 
Bronchial asthma 
 
Bronchospasm 
 
AV block, bradycardia 
 
Acute rhinitis 
 
Acute conjunctivitis 
 
For pupil dilatation 
 
Pathological narcolepsia 
 
Myasthenia 
 
Enuresis. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Insomnia 
 
Anxiety, restlessness, insomnia 
 
Tachycardia 
 
Palpitation 
 
Hypertension 
 
Rash on the skin 
 
Tolerance and tachyphylaxis 
 
Drug dependence. 
 
The drug should not be used in sportsmen (as a doping) 
 
α-ADRENERGIC AGONISTS 
 
α-adrenomimetics are drugs stimulating α-adrenoceptors. Noradrenaline is a 
natural neurotransmitter which binds to all types of adrenoceptors, but only the 
stimulation of α-adrenoceptors is clinically significant. 
 
These preparations are characterized by common pharmacological effects and 
indications (table 7.2). 
 
Table 7.2. Common pharmacological effects 
 
and indications for α-adrenomimetics 
 
α-adrenomimetic effects 
Indications 
Vasoconstriction 
Shock, collapse 
An increase in BP 
Prolongation of local anesthesia 
Mydriasis without cycloplegia 
Rhinitis, conjunctivitis 
Glaucoma, diagnostics of eye diseases 

Chapter 7.  ADRENERGIC AGONISTS 
77
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Noradrenaline is a catecholamine; it has a non-selective action on adrenocep-tors 
with a preferable action on α-adrenoceptors; has a short-durative action, is ad-
ministered only by IV infusion in collapse and acute hypotension; may cause strong 
vasoconstriction and the necrosis of soft tissues, if it is administered SC or IM; is 
contraindicated in blood loss, cardiogenic shock, long-lasting shock. 
 
Phenylephrine (Mesatonum) is a non-catecholamine; has a selective action on 
α1-adrenoceptors; may be taken orally, is administered SC, IM, IV, or topically; has 
the duration of action of 4-6 hrs; is used in acute and chronic hypotension, for 
prolongation of local anesthesia, for producing of midriasis, as well as for a decrease in 
edema of the mucous membrane in acute rhinitis or conjunctivitis. 
 
Naphazoline and halazolin are non-catecholamines; have a selective action 
on α2-adrenoceptors, are used as nasal drops for acute rhinitis, nasal bleeding, and 
rhinoscopia; cause tolerance and tachyphylaxis. 
 
β-ADRENERGIC AGONISTS 
 
β-adrenomimetics are agonists of β-adrenoceptors and increase the 
neurotrans-mission in such synapses. They have some common pharmacological 
properties and indications (table 7.3). 
 
Table 7.3. Common effects and indications for β-adrenomimetics 
 
β-adrenomimetic effects 
Indications 
Dilation of bronchi 
Bronchial asthma, spasm of bronchi 
An increase in the heart rate 
Heart block, bradycardia 
An increase in the heart work 
Danger of pregnancy interruption. 
A decrease in the myometrium tone. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Isoprenaline (Isadrinum) is a synthetic catecholamine; has a non-selective ac-
tion on β1- and β2-adrenoceptpors; is administered sublingually, by inhalation, or IV; is 
used in a bronchial asthma attack, heart block, some types of cardiogenous shock. 
 
Salbutamol is a non-catecholamine; has a selective action on β2-
adrenoceptors, acts longer than isoprenaline; does not act on the heart; is used in 
bronchial asthma, bronchospasm and before bronchoscopia. 
 
Fenoterol (Partusisten) is a non-catecholamine; has a selective action on β2-
adrenoceptors, acts during 4-6 hrs; does not act on the heart; is used in bronchial 
asthma and in danger of pregnancy interruption. 

78 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Dobutamine has a selective action on β1-adrenoceptors; increases cardiac 
output; is administered by IV infusion for the emergency treatment of acute heart 
insufficiency and cardiogenous shock. 
 
COMPARISON OF 
 
ADRENOMIMETICS-CATECHOLAMINS 
 
Adrenomimetics with catecholamine structure are distinguished by their 
affinity to adrenergic receptors (fig. 7.8). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7.8. Chemical structure of catecholamines and their 
affinity to α- and β-adrenoceptors (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
This affinity depends on the structure of substitute radicals. They may be 
methyl in adrenalin or isopropyl in isoproterenol. Noradrenaline has not such 
substitutes in its side chain. 
 
The represented data result in peculiarities of pharmacological effects. It is a 
typical evidence of dependence of drug’s effects on its chemical structure (table 7.4). 
 
Table 7.4. Dependance of catecholamines’ 
 
effects on their chemical structure 
 
Effect 
Adrenaline 
Noradrenaline 
Isoprenaline 
An increase in heart rate 
+ + + 
+ 
+ + 
An increase in blood pressure 
+ + 
+ + + 
– 
Dilation of bronchi 
+ + 
± 
+ + + 
A decrease in gut function 
+ + + 
+ 
+ + 
An increase in glucose level 
+ + + 
± 
± 
(hyperglycemia) 
A decrease in tone of uterus 
+ + + 
± 
+ + 

TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
 
1. Adrenaline is used to treat all the conditions, except: 
 
A. Acute bronchial asthma 
 
B. Capillary bleeding after tooth extraction 
C. Anaphylactic shock 
D. Angina pectoris 
E. Hypoglycemia. 
 
 
2. The drug used to prevent premature labor is: 
 
 
Dobutamine 
 
 
Metoprolol 
 
 
Isadrinum 
 
 
Adrenaline 
 
 
Partusisten (Fenoterol). 
 
№3. Ephedrine: 
 
 
Releases stored noradrenaline from nerve terminals 
 
 
Produces bronchodilation 
 
 
Stimulates CNS 
 
 
Rises systolic blood pressure 
 
 
Produces AV block. 
 
№4. Isoprenaline (Isadrinum) is: 
 
 
Contraindicated in tachyarrhythmia 
 
 
Synthetic catecholamine 
 
 
Bronchodilator 
 
 
Stimulant of the heart function 
 
 
Cardioselective adrenomimetic. 
 
 
 
Anti-adrenergic drugs 
 
 
 
 
Adrenoblockers 
Sympatholytics 
 
 
 
α-adrenoblockers 
β-adrenoblocklers 
α-, β- adrenoblockers 
 
 
Fig. 8.1. Groups of anti-adrenergic drugs. 

80 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
№5. To perform fundoscopy, ophthalmologist instilled in the eye an agent 
capable of causing midriasis without cycloplegia. Point out this agent. 
 
Phenylephrine (Mesatonum) 
 
 
Noradrenaline 
 
 
Atropine 
 
 
Pilocarpine 
 
 
Isoprenaline (Isadrinum). 
 
Answers: 
 
№ 1 – D; № 2 – E; № 3 – A, B, C, D; № 4 – A, B, C, D; № 5 – A. 

Chapter 8.  ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISTS. HISTAMINE- AND SEROTONIN-ERGIC DRUGS 81
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISTS. 
HISTAMINE, SEROTONIN-AND 
DOPAMINERGIC DRUGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANTI-ADRENERGIC DRUGS 
 
Anti-adrenergic drugs are preparations for a decrease in the neurotransmis-
sion in adrenergic synapses due to blockade of adrenoceptors or due to presynaptic 
inhibition of norepinephine release (fig. 8.1). 
 
Classification 
 
 
α-adrenoblockers 
 
 
Non-selective 
 
–  Phentolamine hydrohloride 
 
 
Selective 
 
–  Prazosin 
 
–  Doxazasin 
 
 
β-adrenoblockers 
 
 
Non-selective 
 
–  Propranolol (Anaprilin) 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
–  Oxprenolol 
 
 
Selective 
 
– Metoprolol 
 
– Atenolol 
 
– Nebivolol 
 
– Bisoprolol 
 
 
α-, β-adrenoblockers 
 
–  Labetalol 
 
–  Carvedilol 
 
 
Sympatholytics 
 
–  Guanethidine (Octadinum) 
 
–  Reserpine. 
 
 
α-ADRENOBLOCKERS 
 
α-adrenoblockers are preparations which bind to α-adrenoceptors and 
prevent their stimulation by norepinephrine. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
They bind to α-adrenoceptors and make impossible the interaction between 
norepinephrine and adrenoceptors. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
the dilation of peripheral blood vessels, reducing of peripheral resistance, 
an increase in venous capacity 
 
a decrease in BP 
 
 
the improvement of trophy of peripheral tissues 
 
 
the stimulation of gut motility 
 
 
the stimulation of the salivary, lacrimal, pancreatic, and respioratory tract 
secretions 
 
a decrease of urine retention in patients with prostate hyperplasia. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Hypertension 
 
 
Spasms of peripheral blood vessels (Raynaud’s disease) 
 
 
Frostbites, trophic ulcers 
 
 
Pheochromacitoma (diagnostics and treatment) 
 
 
Prostate hyperplasia. 

Chapter 8.  ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISTS. HISTAMINE- AND SEROTONIN-ERGIC DRUGS 83
 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Headache, vertigo 
 
 
Hypotension 
 
 
Weakness 
 
 
Insomnia 
 
 
Orthostatic collapse 
 
 
Tachycardia 
 
 
Vomiting, nausea, diarrhea 
 
 
Rhinitis. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Phentolamine hydrochloride has a non-selective action (blocks α1- and α2-
adrenoceptors); is administered orally or IV; has a short duration of action; has 
many side-effects; causes tachycardia due to the blockade of α2-adrenoceptors and 
disorders in back-cross regulation of norepinephrine liberation in synapses. 
Prazosin has a selective action on α1-adrenoceptors; is taken orally; acts 
during 4-6 hrs; is used for the treatment of hypertension; has less side- effects. 
 
Doxazosin has a selective action on α1-adrenoceptors; is taken orally; has a 
more durative and strong action than prazosin; decreases urine retention in patients 
with adenoma of prostate; is used for the treatment of hypertension and adenoma 
of prostate. 
 
 
 
 
PROPRANOLOL 
 
 
 
METOPROLOL, ATENOLOL 
 
 
HEART (β1) 
 
 
HEART (β1) 
 
 
BRONCHI (β2) 
 
BLOOD VESSELS (β2) 
 
GI TRACT (β2) 
 
Fig. 8.2. Targets of action of propranolol and cardioselective β-adrenoblockers. 

84 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
β-ADRENOBLOCKERS 
 
β-adrenoblockers are preparations which bind to β-adrenoceptors and 
prevent their stimulation by norepinephrine. 
 
PROPRANOLOL (ANAPRILIN) 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, IV, topically (eye drops) 
 
 
is absorbed in the GI tract 
 
 
binds to proteins in blood serum 
 
 
penetrates CNS 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver 
 
 
is excreted with urine 
 
 
acts during 3-4 hrs. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Propranolol blocks β1-adrenoceptors in the heart and β2-adrenoceptors in 
other organs (blood vessels, bronchi, etc). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
a decrease in automaticity of myocardium 
 
 
a decrease in excitability of myocardium 
 
 
a decrease in conductivity of myocardium 
 
 
a decrease in the heart rate (anti-arrhythmic effect) 
 
 
decreases the heart contractility, striking and minute volume 
 
 
a decrease in the consumption of oxygen by myocardium (antianginal effect) 
 
 
a decrease in the renin’s secretion in the kidney 
 
 
the lowering of BP (antihypertensive effect) 
 
 
the lowering of intraocular pressure 
 
 
sedative action 
 
 
an increase in the tone of bronchi 
 
 
the stimulation of gastric secretion 
 
 
an increase in the peripheral resistance of blood vessels (at the beginning 
of the therapy) 
 
antagonism to adrenaline as to its lipolytic and hyperglycemic action. 

Chapter 8.  ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISTS. HISTAMINE- AND SEROTONIN-ERGIC DRUGS 85
 
Indications 
 
  Hypertension 
 
  Ischemic heart disease (angina pectoris, myocardial infarction) 
 
  Supraventricular tachyarrhythmia 
 
  Hyperthyroidism 
 
  Migraine 
 
  Glaucoma. 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Bradycardia 
1. Bradycardia 
2. Hypotension 
2. Hypotension 
3. Increasing of the heart incompetence 
3. Severe heart failure 
4. Heart block 
4. Heart block 
5. Spasm of bronchi 
5. Bronchial asthma 
6. Hypoglycemia when insulin is given 
6. Ulcerative disease 
together with propranolol 
7. Diabetes mellitus 
7. Fatique, drowsiness, vertigo, depression 
8. Disturbances of peripheral blood circulation 
8. Disturbances of the sexual function in men. 9. Pregnancy. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Metoprolol has a cardioselective action on β1-receptors (fig. 8.2); is taken 
orally for the treatment of hypertension, angina pectoris, and arrhythmia; does not 
cause spasm of bronchi and an increase of gastric secretion; may be used in 
patients with bronchial asthma, ulcerative disease, and diabetes mellitus. 
 
Talinolol has a cardioselective action on β1-receptors; has inner sympathomi-
metic activity and a membrane stabilizing effect (does not inhibit the heart 
contractility and conductivity); has less side-effects and less contraindications 
connected with the influence on β1-adrenoceptors. 
 
Atenolol has cardioselective action on β1-receptors in therapeutic doses; is 
not metabolize in the body, penetrates tissue barriers poorly; therapeutical effect 
starts slowly (2-4 hrs) and lasts near 24 hrs 
 
Nebivolol is cardioselective β1-adrenoblocker with vasodilation properties, 
which are due to metabolic interaction with L-arginine and NO; is used to treat 
chronic hypertension and as a part of combined therapy of congestive heart failure 
(CHF) in old patients. 
 
Bisoprolol is highly selective β1-adrenoblocker in all doses, is taken orally 
once a day for treatment of chronic hypertension, angina pectoris and CHF. 
 
α-, β-ADRENOBLOCKERS 

86 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
α-, β-adrenoblockers are preparations which bind both to α- and β-adrenoceptors, 
prevent their stimulation by norepinephrine, and disturb adrenergic neurotransmission. 
 
LABETALOL 
 
–– blocks both α- and β-adrenoceptors 
 
–– has the action on β-receptors, which is 3 times more potent than the 
action on α-receptors 
 
–– is less active than propranolol 
 
–– is less active than phentolamine 
 
–– is taken orally or IV 
 
–– is indicated for the control of hypertension 
 
–– is contraindicated in the heart block, spasm of a bronchi, pregnancy. 
 
CARVEDILOL 
 
Carvedilol is non-selective β-adrenoblocker and selective α- adrenoblocker. 
Combination of the blockade of β-adrenoceptors with vasodilation is usfull in the 
treatment of ishchemic heart disease, hypertension, and CHF and disfunction of the left 
ventricle of the heart. Active metabolites of the drug have antioxidant efect. 
 
CONCEPT OF INTRINSIC SYMPATHOMIMETIC ACTIVITY 
 
Some β-adrenoblockers (oxprenolol, labetalol) exhibit intrinsic sympa-
thomimetic activity. They are capable of exerting low-level agonist activity at the 
β-adrenoceptor while simultaneously acting as a receptor site antagonist. These 
agents may be useful in the individuals exhibiting excessive bradycardia with 
sustained β- blocker therapy. 
 
SYMPATHOLYTICS 
 
Sympatholytics are adrenergic antagonists of presynaptic action. 
 
RESERPINE 
 
h                                             
s an alkaloid from Rauwolfia serpentine 
 
h                                             
ecreases the storage of norepinephrine that leads to destruction of neu-
rotransmitter by MAO in axonal cytoplasma resulting in a decrease of 
neurotransmission in adrenergic synapses (fig. 8.3) 
 

h                                             
enetrates CNS, has a central and peripheral action (table 8.1) 

Chapter 8.  ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISTS. HISTAMINE- AND SEROTONIN-ERGIC DRUGS 87
 
 
has an antihypertensive, sedative and antipsychotic action 
 
 
is administered orally, IM or IV 
 
 
acts during 8–12 hrs 
 
 
is indicated in hypertension 
 
 
may cause disturbances of sleep, depression, bradycardia, spasm of 
bronchi, stimulation of gastric secretion, diarrhea. 
 
GUANETHIDINE (OCTADINUM) 
 
 
is a synthetic compound of simple structure 
 
 
produces active storage and uptake instead of norepinephrine, decreases 
neurotransmitter release 
 
does not penetrate CNS, has only peripheral action (table 8.1) 
 
Normal 
Reserpine depletion 
A 
B 
Vesicles 
Vesicles 
MAO 
MAO 
 
 
 
 
 
NE 
NE 
 
NE – norepinephrine 
 
Fig. 8.3. Mechanism of reserpine’s action: A – normal condition of 
 
adrenergic synapse; B – adrernergic synapse in the presence of reserpine. 
 
 
  has antihypertensive action, decreases intraocular pressure 
 
  is taken orally or topically (in the form of eye drops) 
 
  action is slow and long (it starts to act in 2–4 days after the beginning of treat-
ment and continues to act during 10–14 days after the ending of treatment) 
  is indicated for hypertension, glaucoma, some types of arrhythmia 
 
  may cause orthostatic hypotension and side-effects connected with preva-
lence of PANS (bradycardia, spasm of bronchi, stimulation of gastric 
secre-tion, diarrhea, enlargement of salivary glands). 

  
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Table 8.1. Comparison of sympatholytics 
  
Drugs 
RESERPINE 
GUANETHIDINE 
Chemical structure 
Alkaloid 
Synthetic compound 
Mechanism of action 
Inhibition of biogenic 
Active uptake and storage, 
amines storage 
not a transmitter 
Central action 
+ 
– 
Peripheral action 
+ 
+ 
Main effect 
Varicosity, ↓ BP 
Varicosity, ↓ BP 
 
HISTAMINERGIC DRUGS 
 
Histaminergic agents include histamine and antihistamines. 
 
HISTAMINE 
 
Histamine is biologically active amine which regulates the tone of smooth 
mus-cles, allergy, inflammation, and secretion of exocrine glands. It realizes its 
action by the binding with histamine receptors. In a clinic histamine is used rarely. 
 
ANTIHISTAMINES 
 
Antihistamines are drugs which antagonize effects of histamine by the 
blockage of histamine receptors or by a decrease of histamine liberation. 
 
Classification 
 
  
Drugs stabilizing mast cells membranes 
 
––  Cromolyn sodium (Sodium cromoglycate, Intal) 
 
––  Ketotifen (Zaditen) 
 
  
Blockers of H1-histamine receptors 
––  Diphenhydramine (Dimedrol) 
 
––  Clemastine (Tavegil) 
 
––  Chloropyramine (Suprastin) 
 
––  Promethazine (Diprazin) 
 
––  Mebhydroline (Diasolinu 
 
––  Quifenadine (Phencarol) 
 
––  Loratadine 
 
––  Fexofenadine 
 
  
Blockers of H2-histamine receptors 

Chapter 8. 
ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISTS. HISTAMINE- AND SEROTONIN-ERGIC DRUGS 
89
–– Ranitidine 
–– Famotidine. 
 
MAST CELL STABILIZERS 
 
 
Cromolyn sodium 
 
  is administered by inhalation 
 
  stabilizes basophiles membranes, prevents the release of histamine and 
other allergy mediators 
  is used for the prophylaxis of the bronchial asthma attack, allergic 
rhinitis, and conjunctivitis 
  may cause the irritation of respiratory pathways, spasm of bronchi, head-
ache, cough. 
 
Ketotifen 
 
 
is administered orally 
 
 
stabilizes basophiles membranes, prevents the release of histamine and 
other allergy mediators; has a weak antihistamine and sedative action 
 
is used for the prophylaxis of bronchial asthma attack 
 
 
may cause such side-effects as drowsiness, dry mouth, dizziness, throm-
bocytopenia 
 
is contraindicated for patients whose job needs quick motor reaction. 
 
BLOCKERS OF H1–HISTAMINE RECEPTORS 
 
DIPHENHYDRAMINE (DIMEDROL) 
 
Diphenhydramine is a synthetic drug, dimethylaminoethanol derivative (fig. 8.4). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8.4. Chemical structure of diphenhydramine. 

90 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
  Ā          ȀĀ⸀Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ            
s administered orally, IM, IV, rectally, topically (ointment, eye drops) 
 
  Ā          ȀĀ⸀Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ            
s absorbed in the GI tract 
 
  Ā          ȀĀ⸀Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ            
enetrates CNS and placenta 
 
  Ā          ȀĀ⸀Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ            
s metabolized in the liver, is the inductor of microsomal oxidation 
 
  Ā          ȀĀ⸀Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ            
s excreted by urine 
 
  Ā          ȀĀ⸀Ā ᜀ            Ā ᜀ            
as the duration of action of 6-8 hrs. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
The drug blocks H1-histamine receptors and inhibits effects of histamine, 
especially allergic reactions 
 
It blocks cholinergic receptors 
 
 
It blocks adrenergic and serotonin receptors. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
the inhibition of a histamine action 
 
 
a decrease of allergic reactions 
 
 
a decrease in edema of tissues due to histamine 
 
 
a decrease in permeability of blood vessels wall 
 
 
a decrease of inflammation 
 
 
a decrease in spasms of smooth muscles 
 
 
ganglia blocking effect 
 
 
sedative and hypnotic effect 
 
 
anti-emetic effect 
 
 
potentiative action. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Allergic diseases (angioneurotic edema, hay fever, urticaria, vasomotor 
rhinitis, serum sickness) 
 
Allergic complications of blood transfusion 
 
 
Allergic complications of pharmacotherapy 
 
 
Hemorrhagic capillary toxicosis 
 
 
Radiation sickness 
 

 
Motion sickness 
 
 
Insomnia 
 
 
The potentiation of general anesthesia. 
 
Side-effects 
 
1. Weakness, fatigue, psychomotor impairment, depression 

Chapter 8.  ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISTS. HISTAMINE- AND SEROTONIN-ERGIC DRUGS 91
 
 
Dry mouth 
 
 
Blurred vision 
 
 
Urinary retention 
 
 
Gastro-intestinal disturbances 
 
 
Changes of the effects of other drugs. 
 
The drug should not be used during driving or together with alcoholic drinks. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Clemastine (Tavegil) is taken orally; acts during 12 hrs; has a strong 
antihista-mine and weak sedative effect. 
 
Chloropyramine (Suprastin) is taken orally, IM, IV; has an overage antihista-
mine and sedative effect accompanied by a significant M-cholinoblocking action. 
 
Promethazine (Diprasin) is administered orally, IM, IV; blocks α-adrenoceptors; 
has denominated sedative, hypnotic and vestibuloprotective actions; may be used for 
the treatment of motion sickness and vestibule disturbances; may cause hypotension. 
 
Mebhydroline (Diazolin) is taken orally; acts during 48 hrs; has a minimal 
sedative action (day-time antihistamine). 
 
Loratadine is taken orally; acts during 48 hrs; has an overage antihistamine 
action; does not penetrate CNS, has not a sedative action (day-time antihistamine). 
 
Quifenadine (Phencarol) is taken orally; blocks H1-receptors and increases 
the enzymic inactivation of histamine; has an overage antihistamine and 
antiserotonin action, but a minimal sedative action. 
 
BLOCKERS OF H2-HISTAMINE RECEPTORS 
 
These preparations block H2-histamine receptors and decrease gastric secretion. 
They have common indications: ulcerative disease, symptomatic ulcer, gastroe-
sophagitis. Detailed description of these drugs is represented in Chapter 24. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Ranitidine is administered orally (1-2 times a day), IV; side-effects: 
headache, vertigo, weakness, skin rash, thrombocytopenia. 
 
Famotidine is administered orally or IV (1-2 times a day); inhibits basal gastric 
secretion, as well as stimulated secretion; is more effective; has less side-effects. 
 
SEROTONIN-ERGIC DRUGS 

Serotonin-ergic drugs are agents which stimulate or block serotonin receptors 
(5-HT). 
 
SEROTONIN ADIPINATE 
 
 
is administered IV or IM 
 
 
is the agonist of serotonin receptors 
 
 
decreases the permeability of the blood vessels wall 
 
 
is used as an anti-hemorrhagic agent in hemorrhagic vasculitis, hypo- and 
aplastic anemia, thrombocytopenia, hemorrhagic syndrome accompanied 
the anti-cancer chemotherapy 
 
 
may cause pain in abdomen, pain in the heart, headache, elevation of BP, 
 
GI disturbances, decreases diuresis after a quick IV administration. 
 
CYPROHEPTADIN (PERITOL) 
 
 
is taken orally 
 
 
is a strong antagonist of serotonin receptors; also blocks H1-histamine 
recep-tors and cholinergic receptors 
 
 
is an anti-allergic agent; blocks hypersecretion of ACTH and STH 
 
 
is used in allergy, migraine, anorexia 
 
 
may cause somnolence, dry mouth, vertigo, ataxia, skin rash. 
 
SUMATRIPTAN 
 
 
is structurally similar to serotonin (5-HT 
 
 
is a 5-HT receptor types 5-HT1D and 5-HT1B agonist 
 
 
causes vasoconstriction of dilated cranial and basilar arteries, decreases 
the activity of the trigeminal nerve 
 
is efficactive in the treating cluster headaches and migraine. 
 
DOPAMINERGIC DRUGS 
 
DOPAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE 
 
 
is the agonist of dopamine receptors 
 
 
has cardistimulant, vasodilation, and diuretic action 
 
 
is used by IV infusion in shock of different origin, functioinal renal failure, 
 
CHF 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Only one drug belongs to α-adrenoblockers: 
 
A. Carbochol 

Chapter 9.  DRUGS FOR GENERAL ANESTHESIA 
93
 
 
Adrenaline hydrochloride 
 
 
Prazosin 
 
 
Propranolol 
 
 
Guanethidine. 
 
№2. All the drugs are used for the treatment of hypertension, except: 
 
 
Prazosin 
 
 
Anaprilinum 
 
 
Diphenhydramine 
 
 
Labetalol 
 
 
Reserpine. 
 
№3. The following statements concerning guanethidine are correct 
 
 
It is a potent antihypertensive agent 
 
 
It causes vasodilatation 
 
 
It blocks β-adrenoceptors 
 
 
It acts presynaptically 
 
 
It blocks α-adrenoceptors. 
 
№4. Dimedrolum is applied in a clinic for: 
 
 
The treatment of bronchial asthma 
 
 
Allergic diseases 
 
 
Allergic complications of pharmacological therapy 
 
 
Hemorrhagical diathesis 
 
 
Hypertension. 
 
№5. An adrenoblocking drug was prescribed for the treatment of angina pecto-
ris, but bradycardia, bronchospasm, and gastric ulcer had been developed. 
What drug was used? What drug from the same pharmacological group may 
be used for the replacement of the first remedy? 
 
 
Labetalol, propranolol for its replacement 
 
 
Propranolol, metoprolol for its replacement 
 
 
Propranolol, prazosin for its replacement 
 
 
Phentolamine, metoprolol for its replacement 
 
 
Propranolol, diphenhydramine for its replacement. 
 
Answers: 
 
№ 1 – C; № 2 – C; № 3 – А, B, D; № 4 – B, C, D; № 5 – B. 

94 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DRUGS FOR GENERAL 
ANESTHESIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DRUGS INHIBITING CNS 
 
Drugs inhibiting CNS are divided into eight groups (fig. 9.1). They include 
general anesthetics, sedatives, hypnotics, neuroleptics, anxiolytics, analgesics, 
anti-convulsants, and antiparkinsonian drugs. 
 
 
Drugs inhibiting CNS 
 
Drugs for general anesthesia 
 
Sedatives 
 
Hypnotics 
 
Neuroleptics 
 
Anxiolytics 
 
Analgesics 
 
Anticonvulsants 
 
Antiparkinsonian drugs 
 
Fig. 9.1. Main groups of CNS inhibitors. 

Chapter 9.  DRUGS FOR GENERAL ANESTHESIA 
95
 
GENERAL ANESTHESIA 
 
General anesthesia (narcosis) is a reversible suppression of CNS with the 
aboli- shing of pain and all kinds of sensitivity, with myorelaxation and 
unconsciousness (fig. 9.2). 
 
 
Muscle relaxation 
Loss of consciousness 
Autonomic stabilization 
Motor 
Pain and 
Autonomic 
reflexes 
suffering 
reflexes 
 
 
 
Nociception 
 
Analgesia 
 
Pain stimulus 
 
Fig. 9.2. Main goals of general anesthesia (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Disparities between general and local anesthesia 
 
General anesthesia and local anesthesia both are used for abolishing of pain 
in surgery, but they have significant distinctinctive features (table 9.1). 
 
Table 9.1. Disparities between general and local anesthesia 
 
General anesthesia 
Local anesthesia 
–  Total abolihing of pain 
–  Local abolishing of pain 
–  A loss of consciousness 
– 
Normal consciousness 
–  Relaxation of skeletal muscles 
– 
Normal muscular tone 
–  Abolishing of reflexes 
– 
Normal reflexes 
–  Usage for all kinds of surgeries 
–  Usage for uncavitary surgeries 
 
Main concepts of general anesthesia 
 
 Induction to anesthesia (inductive narcosis) is the start of narcosis which 
should be pleasant for the patient 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Basis narcosis is the maintenance of narcosis for all the periods of surgery 
 
 
Mixed narcosis is the combined usage of general anesthetics from one 
pharmacological group (Halothane + Nitrous oxide) 
 
Combined narcosis (balanced anasthesia) is the combined usage of 
general anesthetics and preparations from another pharmacological group 
(ganglia blockers, myorelaxants, etc.) (fig. 9.3) 
 
 
Safety margin is the difference between the dose that causes surgical an-
esthesia and the dose that causes lethal suppression of the respiratory center 
 
 
Premedication (preanesthetical madication) is the administration of 
prepa-rations for the potentiation of narcosis, as well as for the 
prophylaxis of side-effects of general anesthesia. 
 
 
For 
unconscious- 
ness: e.g. 
halothane 
For 
or propofol 
For 
muscle 
autonomic 
relaxation 
stabilization 
e.g. pancu- 
e.g. 
ronium 
For 
atropine 
analgesia 
e.g. N20 
or fentanyl 
 
 
Fig. 9.3. Balanced anesthesia (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
DRUGS FOR GENETRAL ANESTHESIA 
 
According to their routs of administration general anesthetics are divided 
into inhalation anesthetics and preparations for IV anesthesia. These two groups 
are distinguished by some properties (table 9.2). 
 
INHALATION ANESTHETICS 
 
Inhalation anesthetics are preparations for general anesthesia which are ad-
ministered by inhalation through a special mask or system. 

Chapter 9.  DRUGS FOR GENERAL ANESTHESIA 
97
 
Table 9.2. Distinguishes between inhalation and IV general anesthetics 
 
Inhalation anesthetics 
Drugs for IV anesthesia 
– Inhalation administration 
– 
IV administration 
–  Long duration of narcosis 
–  Short duration of narcosis 
– Strong myorelaxation 
– 
Weak myorelaxation 
– Well managed anesthesia 
– 
Unmanaged anesthesia 
–  Usage for cavitary surgeries 
–  Usage for short uncavitary surgeries 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 
Volatile liquids 
–  Ether for narcosis (Aether pro narcosi) 
–  Halothane (Phthorothanum) 
–  Isoflurane 
–  Sevoflurane 
 
Gaseous anesthetics 
–  Nitrous oxide 
 
–  Xenon. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
It is based on the lipid solubility of inhalation general anesthetics and their 
ability to dissolve in the cell membrane lipids resulting in the inhibiting of neuro-
transmission (fig. 9.4). 
 
 
Binding to 
Changes in 
membrane lipids 
membranes viscosity 
A decrease 
Changes of permeability 
in depolarization 
of ion channels 
Inhibition of 
NARCOSIS 
neurotransmission 
 
Fig. 9.4. Mechanism of action of inhalation general anesthetics. 
 
Stages of narcosis 
 
Deepening of narcosis leads to the development of four stages of general anesthesia: 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Analgesia with the absence of pain and the possibility to carry out short 
surgeries; 
ΙΙ. Excitement with many disturbances in the organism (motor and speech 
excitement, heart arrhythmia, heart arrest, changes in BP, irregulary respiration, 
respiratory arrest, spasm of bronchi, spasm of larinx, vomiting, hypersalivation), 
which make surgerical intervention impossible; 
 
ΙΙΙ. Surgical anesthesia (planes 1-4), which is characterized by a loss of pain, 
unconsciousness, myorelaxation, absence of reflexes, stability of BP and 
respiration that is suitable for the majority of surgeries; 
 
ΙV. Awakening with the restoration of CNS functions (if the concentration of 
the drug decreases), or medulla paralysis (if the concentration of the general 
anesthetic increases). 
  
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Ether for narcosis is a volatile inflammable liquid with specific odor; 80% of dose is 
excreted unchanged with the air (fig. 9.5); has a wide safety margin of the narcosis action, 
but a long stage of excitement; is used for basis mono- and combined narco-sis; irritates the 
upper respiratory pathways; may cause pneumonia after the surgery. 
 
Halothane (Phthorotanum) is a volatile liquid; contains fluorine; is not inflam-
mable; has a strong narcosis action , but weak analgesia; has long stage of analgesia 
without the excitement stage; dilates bronchi (may be used for the termination of a 
severe bronchial asthma attack); dilates blood vessels; lowers BP; increases the 
myocardium sensitivity to catecholamines (adrenaline and noradrenaline are con-
traindicated during this narcosis); decreases the tone of uterus; is metabolized in the 
liver (fig. 9.5) and may cause liver lesion; is used for combined general anesthesia. 
 
Isoflurane is similar to halothane; displays good myorelaxation and rapid 
recovery; has a less negative influence on the heart and liver; is the best agent in 
pediatric patients. 
 
Sevoflurane is a sweet-smelling, nonflammable, highly fluorinated methyl 
isopropyl ether used as an inhalational anesthetic for induction and maintenance of 
general anesthesia; has fast onset and offset; is one of the most commonly used 
volatile anesthetic agents, particularly for outpatient anesthesia, It is often 
administered in a combination with nitrous oxide and oxygen. 
 
Nitrous oxide is a gaseous anesthetic; is biologically inert (fig. 9.5); has a weak 
narcosis action (is not used as a sole anesthetic for surgeries); does not cause good 
myorelaxation; has strong analgesia; a rapid onset of action and recovery; is used for 
analgesia in traumas, myocardial infarction, or labor, as well as for inductive and 
combined narcosis; is not toxic; may cause hypoxia in concentration about 80%. 

Chapter 9.  DRUGS FOR GENERAL ANESTHESIA 
99
  
Fig. 9.5. Routes of elimination of inhalation anesthetics (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Xenon is the inert gas giving rapid induction and recovery in general 
anesthesia. The most important positive effects of Xenon are cardiovascular 
stability, cerebral protection and favorable pharmacokinetics. 
 
DRUGS FOR INTRAVENOUS ANESTHESIA 
 
Intravenous anesthetics are drugs for general anesthesia which are adminis-
tered IV. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
According to the duration of action 
 
 
Long-acting (more than 60 min) 
 
–  Sodium hydroxibutyrate 
 
 
Intermediate-acting (20-30 min) 
 
–  Thiopental-sodium 
 
 
Short-acting (10–20 min) 
 
–  Ketamine (Ketamini hydrochloridum, Kalipsol) 
 
 
Ultra-short-acting (3-5 min) 
 
–  Propofol 

100 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
According to the mechanism of action 
 
 
GABA-ergic 
 
–  Sodium hydroxibutyrate 
 
–  Propofol 
 
 
Barbiturate-ergic 
 
–  Thiopental-sodium 
 
 
Glutamateergic 
 
–  Ketamine. 
 
CHLORIDE CHANNEL 
 
Some IV general anesthetics, hypnotics, tranquilizers, and other CNS inhibitors 
realize their effects by interaction with receptors of Cl– channels (fig. 9.6). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9.6. Cloride channel (adapted from R. Finkel et al., 2008). 
 
SODIUM HYDROXIBUTYRATE 
 
By its chemical structure, the drug is the analogue of GABA (natural 
inhibiting neurotransmitter). 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered IV, IM, orally 
 
 
begins to act in 5-7 min after IV administration 
 
 
acts during 2-4 hrs 
 
 
is completely metabolized in the body. 

Chapter 9.  DRUGS FOR GENERAL ANESTHESIA 
101
 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Sodium oxibutyrate stimulates GABA-receptors of Cl–channels (fig.9.7). 
 
 
A result is the opening of Cl– channels and an increase in Cl– influx into 
the cell. 
 
Increased Cl– concentration leads to the hyperpolarization of the cell 
mem-brane and more difficult depolarization. 
 
These processes result in the reduction of neurons excitability, sleep, and 
general anesthesia. 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
General anesthesia 
 
 
A sedative action 
 
 
A hypnotic action 
 
 
An anti-seizure action 
 
 
An antihypoxic action 
 
 
A nootropic action (after a long-term treatment). 
 
 
 
Stimulation of GABA-receptors 
 
Opening of CI channels 
 
 CI entry into the cell 
 
Hyperpolarization of cell mem- 
 
brane. Difficult depolarization 
 
Reduced excitability 
 
NARCOSIS 
 
 
Fig. 9.7. Mechanism of action of sodium hydroxibutyrate. 
 
 
Side-effects 
 
The drug is not toxic, but may cause hypokalemia. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 

Thiopental sodium is administered IV; begins to act in 1-3 min; acts during 20-
30 min; is destroyed in microsomes of the liver; is accumulated in the fat tissue; 
stimulates barbiturate receptors of CL-ion channels; displays a rapid onset of ac-tion; 
has potent anesthesia, poor analgesia, and little myorelaxation; has a hypnotic action; 
is used for the induction to narcosis, general anesthesia in short-term surger-ies and 
diagnostic investigations; may cause the suppression of respiration, apnea, 
bronchospasm, laryngospasm, hypotension, arrhythmia, liver lesions, lowering of the 
body temperature, thrombophlebitis; is contraindicated in the heart failure, bronchial 
asthma, diseases of the upper respiratory pathways, shock, acidosis. 
 
Ketamine is administered IV, IM; begins to act in 30-60 sec after administration; 
acts during 15-30 min; may be administered repeatedly in a lower dose. Ketamine acts 
primarily as a selective antagonist of the NMDA receptor, an ionotropic glu-tamate 
receptor. Also it is an agonist of different subtypes of opioid receptors, the agonist of 
dopamine D2 receptor and potentiator of 5-HT receptor, The drug causes “dissociate 
narcosis”; causes general anesthesia accompanied by strong analgesia during narcosis 
and after it (6-8 hrs); stimulates blood circulation (increases heart rate, minute volume 
of the heart and BP); does not inhibit respiration; does not cause myorelaxation and 
impairment of reflexes; has psychotomimetic action at the start and at the end of 
narcosis; may cause postoperative hallucinations. It is used for starting and 
maintaining of anesthesia, for chronic pain and for sedation in the intensive care. The 
drug can be used in children, in patients with shock or low BP, asthmatics or people 
with chronic obstructive airway disease, emergency surgery in field conditions in war 
zones, and to supplement spinal or epidural anesthesia. Ketamine causes such side 
effects as muscles regidity, block of upper respiratory pathways, psychomotor 
excitement; is contraindicated for patients with hypertension and disturbances of 
cerebral blood circulation. It can cause drug dependence and is strongly controlled 
substance. 
 
Propofol is a short-acting IV general anesthetic. It has several mechanisms of 
action, both through activation of GABAA receptor and acting as a sodium chan-
nel blocker. Endocannabinoid system may contribute significantly to propofol's 
anesthetic action. Propofol’s uses include the starting and maintenance of general 
anesthesia, sedation for mechanically ventilated adults, procedural sedation, and 
status epilepticus. Maximum effect takes about 2 min to occur and lasts 5-10 min. 
Common side effects are irregular heart rate, low BP, burning sensation at the site 
of injection, and the stopping of breathing. The drug may cause addiction and 
propofol infusion syndrome. 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 

Chapter 10.
 
ETHANOL. HYPNOTICS. ANTI-EPILEPTIC AND ANTIPARKINSONIAN DRUGS
 
103 
 
 
 
NAD 
NADH 
NAD 
NADH 
 
 
 
 
Ethanol 
  Acetaldehyde  
    Acetate 
 
Fig.10.1. Hepatic metabolism of ethanol. 
 
№1. The III stage of general anesthesia (a stage of surgical anesthesia) is 
mani-fested by all, except: 
 
 
4 planes of its 
development В. Excitement 
C. A progressive a decrease in the muscular tone 
D. A progressive a decrease in reflexes 
E.  Stability of BP (at planes 1-2). 
 
№2. Only one IV general anesthetic has antihypoxic and nootropic properties: 
 
 
Ketamine 
 
 
Propofol 
 
 
Sodium oxibutyrate 
 
 
Kalipsol 
 
 
Thiopental-sodium. 
 
№3. Nitrous oxide is characterized by the following properties: 
 
 
Good analgesia 
 
 
Good anesthesia 
 
 
Poor muscle relaxation 
 
 
High liver toxicity 
 
 
Usage in obstetrics. 
 
№4. Ketamine is: 
 
 
A long-acting general anesthetic 
 
 
An increasing cardiac output 
 
 
Producing profound analgesia 
 
 
Not abolishing reflexes 
 
 
Used for short operations. 

104 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
№5. Lowering of BP has been developed during the surgery under the com-
bined general anesthesia including halothane. The anesthesiologist 
chooses Mesatonum for the correction of the patient’s condition because 
adrenaline or noradrnaline are contraindicated in this case. What is the 
ground of such contraindications? 
 
 
Halothane’s liver toxicity 
 
 
Halothane’s neurotoxicity 
 
 
A combined action of general anesthetics 
 
 
Halothane’s ability to dilate blood vessels 
 
 
The sensibilization of the myocardium to catecholamines. 
 
Answers: 
 
№ 1 – B; № 2 – C; № 3 – A, C, E; № 4 – B, C, D, E; № 5 – E. 

Chapter 10.
 
ETHANOL. HYPNOTICS. ANTI-EPILEPTIC AND ANTIPARKINSONIAN DRUGS
 
105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 ETHANOL. HYPNOTICS. ANTI-
EPILEPTIC AND 
ANTIPARKINSONIAN DRUGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHANOL 
 
(Alcohol, Spiritus aethylicus) 
 
Ethanol’s chemical structure is C2H5OH. It is a water and lipid-soluble liquid 
with a specific odor. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is applied topically, IV, orally, or by inhalation 
 
 
after the oral administration, it is absorbed in the oral cavity, in the stomach 
 
(less than 20% of a dose), in the small intestine (80% of administered dose) 
 
 
penetrates CNS and the placenta barrier 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver (fig. 10.1) 
 
 
is excreted with urine and with air. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
Ethanol has local and resorptive actions. 
 
Local action of ethanol 

106 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
The inhibition of oxidoreductases 
 
 
The denaturation of proteins 
 
 
The irritation of sensitive nerve endings, local hyperemia 
 
 
Alcohol vapor changes the surface tension of the surfactant in the lungs. 
 
Effects 
 
 
an antiseptic action 
 
 
a disinfective action 
 
 
an irritating action 
 
 
a tannic effect 
 
 
an antifoam action (after inhalation). 
 
 
The processing of the surgeon’s hands and the surgical area (70%) 
 
 
The processing of instruments (95%) 
 
 
Compresses (40%) 
 
 
The inhalation in the mixture with oxygen in pulmonary edema 
 
 
Preparing alcohol solutions and tinctures. 
 
Resorptive action of ethanol 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Ethanol acts as inhalation general anesthetic with a narrow safety margin. 
 
 
It is an energy substrate for the organism (fig. 10.1). 
 
 
an anxiolytic action 
 
 
an anti-shock effect 
 
 
the stimulation of energy metabolism 
 
 
an increase in BP 
 
 
an increase in heat irradiation 
 
 
changes in gastric secretion (till 20% – stimulation, about of 20% – suppression) 
 
 
a diuretic action resulting from the inhibition of vasopressin secretion 
 
 
an antidote action. 
 
 
Shock (20%, IV) 
 
 
Abscess or gangrene of lung (20%, IV) 
 
 
Cachexia (20%, IV) 
 
 
Producing sclerosis in the varicose vein (70%, inside the pathological vein) 
 
 
Alcoholizing of nerves (inside the nerve at the surgery) 
 
 
Diagnostics of the gastric function (10%, orally) 

Chapter 10.
 
ETHANOL. HYPNOTICS. ANTI-EPILEPTIC AND ANTIPARKINSONIAN DRUGS
 
107 
 
 
 Acute poisoning with methanol (20%, IV). 
 
Acute poisoning with ethanol 
 
Main signs: 
Emergency help: 
– 
a specific odor 
–  the lavage of the stomach with a 
–  euphoria, excitement, then sleeping and coma 
solution of potassium permanga- 
–  hyperemia of the face, then paleness 
nate 
–  a decrease in BP 
– 
analeptics (Bemegridum) 
–  the suppression of respiration 
–  glucose, insulin, and vitamins 
– 
hyporeflexia 
preparations (IV) 
– 
hypotermia 
– 
nootrops (pyracetam, IV). 
–  unvoluntary urination. 
 
Alcohol abuse (alcoholism) 
 
It is tolerance and physical/psychological dependence (due to the 
participation of acetaldehyde in the synthesis of opioid peptides). 
 
Main disorders in the organism: 
 
–– Alcohol encephalopathy 
 
–– Alcohol polyneuritis 
 
–– Alcohol myocardiopathy 
 
–– Alcohol cirrhosis 
 
–– Hypoacidic gastritis 
 
–– Impotency in men 
 
–– A negative influence on the fetus in pregnant women. 
 
Abstinence is manifested as alcohol delirium. 
 
Treatment of alcoholism 
 
The therapy of alcohol abuse is carried out by the production of a conditioned 
reflex to the alcohol, combining its usage with such drugs as Emetine 
hydrochloride or Teturam (Disulfiram) (fig. 10.2). Disulfiram blocks 
acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, inhibits alcohol metabolism with the accumulation 
of toxic acetaldehyde. Nausea, vomiting and other disturbances caused by this 
process are the basis of negative reflex to alcohol. 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
DISULFIRAM 
 
 
 
 
Ethanol 
  Acetaldehyde  
    Acetate 
 
 
 
Inhibition of acetaldehyde dehy- 
 
drogenase  
 
Acetaldehyde accumulation  
 
Nausea, vomiting,  BP, heart 
 
ache, sense of awe  
 
Negative reflex on alcohol 
 
Fig. 10.2. Mechanism of action of disulfiram. 
 
HYPNOTICS 
 
Hypnotics are the drugs for the treatment of insomnia. They induce the onset 
of sleep and maintain it. Normal sleep is characterized by two stages: REM-sleep 
(Rapid Eye Movement Sleep) and NREM-sleep (Non-Rapid Eye Movement 
Sleep). The state of sleep differs from the waking state by the activity of 
neurotransmitters in the brain (fig. 10.3). 
 
 
 
 
Neurons with 
transmitters: 
 
Histamine 
Acetylcholine 
Glutamate 
Norepinephrine 
Waking state 
NREM-sleep 
GABA 
 
Fig. 10.3. Neurotransmission in the brain in the waking state and NREM sleep (by H. 
Lüllmann, 2000). 

Chapter 10. 
ETHANOL. HYPNOTICS. ANTI-EPILEPTIC AND ANTIPARKINSONIAN 
DRUGS 
109 
 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 
Barbiturates 
 
–  Phenobarbital 
 
–  Barbital 
 
–  Ethaminal (Aethaminalum-natrium) 
 
 
Benzodiazepines 
 
–  Nitrazepam 
 
 
Aliphatic compounds 
 
–  Chloral hydrate 
 
 
Other preparations 
 
–  Donormyl 
 
–  Zopiclone 
 
–  Zaleplon. 
 
PHENOBARBITAL 
 
 
 
Epilepsy 
 
 
 
Generalized 
Partial (focal) 
Grand mal (tonic- 
Simple 
clonic seizures) 
Petit mal 
Complex 
(absence) 
 
Myoclonic 
 
Febrile 
 
seizures in children 
 
Status 
 
epilepticus 
 
Fig. 10.5. Types of epilepsy as the basis for differential pharmacotherapy. 

110 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
It is a derivative of the barbituric acid (fig. 10.4). The substance is not soluble 
in water, but solubility is increased in alkalic pH. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 10.4. Chemical structure of phenobarbital. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally 
 
 
is absorbed in the small intestine 
 
 
is strongly bound to proteins in plasma 
 
 
penetrates CNS and placenta 
 
 
is metabolized in microsomes of the liver 
 
 
is the inductor of microsomal oxidation 
 
 
is excreted with urine 
 
 
is accumulated (material accumulation) 
 
 
starts to act in 30-60 min after the administration and acts during 6-8 hrs, 
stays in the body during 1-2 days. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 The drug binds to barbiturate receptors of chloride channels. 
 
 That results in enhancement of GABAA-receptors’ activation and opening of 
chloride channels. 
 
 An increase in the Cl- influx leads to the membrane hyperpolarization, dif-
ficult depolarization, and the inhibition of neuron functions. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
a hypnotic action with the change in normal sleep structure (inhibition of 
REM-sleep) 
 
 
a sedative action 

Chapter 10.
 
ETHANOL. HYPNOTICS. ANTI-EPILEPTIC AND ANTIPARKINSONIAN DRUGS
 
111 
 
 
 
an anti-epileptic action 
 
 
the potentiation of the effect of other drugs inhibiting CNS. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Insomnia 
 
 
Epilepsy with grand mal 
 
 
Ictrerus in newborns 
 
 
As the ingredient of combined sedative preparations 
 
 
As the ingredient of combined analgesic preparations. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
The after-action syndrome (weakness, drowsiness, apathy, slow motor 
reaction in the morning) 
 
 
The return-syndrome after rapid cancellation of the drug 
 
 
Tolerance due to the induction of microsomal oxidation (fig. 10.4) 
 
 
Drug dependence 
 
 
Changes in pharmacokinetics of other drugs due to the induction of 
micro-somal oxidation (fig. 10.5) 
 
 
The suppression of respiration 
 
 
Hypotension 
 
 
Liver lesions. 
 
Contraindications 
 
Liver and renal diseases, hypotension, intermitted purpura, age about 60 or 
till 10 years old, pregnancy. 
 
The drug should not be used in patients whose job needs quick motor 
reaction, as well as for long treatment. 

112
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
BARBITURATES 
Induction 
Tolerance 
Changes in pharmacokinetics of 
of microsomal 
oxidation in 
co-administered drugs 
the liver 
Contraindication for the 
METABOLITES 
patients with intermitted purpura 
 
 
Fig. 10.5. Inhibition of microsomal oxidation by phenobarbital and its result. 
 
Acute poisoning with barbiturates 
 
Main signs: 
Emergency help: 
– 
sleep, coma 
–  the lavage of the stomach 
– 
hyporeflexia 
– activated charcoal 
–  a decrease of the muscles tone 
– laxatives (magnesium sulfate) 
– 
suppression of respiration 
–  hemodilution and forced diuresis 
– 
hypotension 
– hemodialysis 
– 
hypothermia 
–  alaleptic Bemegridum (antagonist of barbiturates). 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Nitrazepam is a benzodiazepine derivative; is the agonist of benzodiazepine 
receptors of Cl- ion channels; has a hypnotic action with minimal changes in the 
normal sleeping structure; has anxiolytic, sedative, central myorelaxative and po-
tentiative effects; is used in insomnia, neurosis, epilepsy, abstinence in alcoholics; 
has less side-effects than phenobarbital (less tolerance, drug dependence, and 
return syndrome); does not produce the activation of liver enzymes. 
 
Chloral hydrate is administered orally or rectally; is converted to 
trichloretha-nol; has an anti-seizure and sedative action; is applied in seizures, 
insomnia, and severe cough in children; irritates mucous membranes (is used with 
the addition of starch mucus). 
 
Donormyl is H1-histamine blocker from the group of ethanolamines. The 
drug has a hypnotic, sedative and M-anticholinergic action. Reduces the time of 
falling asleep, increases the duration and quality of sleep, while not changing the 
phase of sleep. The duration of action is 6-8 hours. 

Chapter 10.
 
ETHANOL. HYPNOTICS. ANTI-EPILEPTIC AND ANTIPARKINSONIAN DRUGS
 
113 
 
 
Zopiclone is cyclopirrolone derivative, which interacts with ω1- and ω2 -ben-
zodiazepine receptors of the macromolecular GABA-benzodiazepine-chloronophore 
complex. The drug shortens the period of falling asleep, reduces the number of noc-
turnal awakenings, improves the quality of sleep, does not change the phase structure 
of sleep. It is effective in situational insomnia, changes in the usual rhythm of life, and 
a shift work regime. Sleep occurs within 20-30 min and lasts 6-8 hours. Side effects 
are drowsiness, lethargy, headache, dizziness, irritability, confusion, muscle weak-
ness, impaired coordination of movements, diplopia, memory impairment, paradoxal 
reactions. Addiction, drug dependence, and withdrawal syndrome also are possible. 
 
Zaleplon is derivative of pyrazolopyrimidine, which selectively binds to ω0 -
benzodiazepine receptors and excites them, that leads to the opening of chlorine 
channels, hyperpolarization, and inhibition in the CNS. It reduces the latent time 
of falling asleep, prolongs the sleep time in the first half of the night, does not 
change the ratio of the sleep phases. Doses of 5-10 mg do not cause tolerance at 2-
4 weeks. The drug has sedative, weak anxiolytic and central myorelaxant effect. 
Indications to use are short-term treatment of severe forms of sleep disorders 
(difficulty falling asleep), disturbing day activity. The most common undesirable 
effects are memory impairment, paresthesia, drowsiness and dysmenorrhea. 
 
 
ANTICONVULSANTS 
 
EPILEPSY AND ITS PHARMACOTHERAPY 
 
Epilepsy is the disease of the brain with attacks of seizures. There are some 
types of epilepsy (fig. 10.5). 
 
Principles of the treatment of epilepsy 
 
 
The choice of the drug according to the type of epilepsy 
 
 
A long-term treatment 
 
 
The oral administration of drugs 
 
 
An equal dose of a new drug, if the change of preparation is needed 
 
 
Slow cancellation of the drug. 
 
ANTI-EPILEPTIC DRUGS 
 
Anti-epileptics are drugs of a different chemical structure which prevent 
attacks of epilesy (fig. 10.6). 

114 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 10.6. Chemical structure of anti-epileptics. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 
Preparations for the treatment of epilepsy with grand mal 
 
–  Phenobarbital 
 
–  Phenytoin (Dipheninum) 
 
–  Carbamazepine (finlepsin) 
 
–  Valproic acid, Sodium valproate 
 
–  Clonazepam 
 
–  Lamotrigine 
 
 Preparations for the treatment of epilepsy with petit mal 
 
–  Valproic acid 
 
–  Clonazepam 
 
–  Lamotrigine 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Most excitory nerve cells utilize glutamate and most inhibitory nerve cells 
utilize GABA. Glutamate receptors comprise three subtypes, of which the 
NMDA subtype has he greatest therapeutic importance. N-metyl-D-aspartrate 
(NMDA) is a synthetic selective agonist. The stimulation of these receptors 
permits the entry of both Na+ and Ca++ into the cell. 
 
 
Phenytoin, phenobarbital, and a lamotrigine inhibit release of glutamate 
 
(fig.10.7). 

Chapter 10.
 
ETHANOL. HYPNOTICS. ANTI-EPILEPTIC AND ANTIPARKINSONIAN DRUGS
 
115 
 
 
 
Na+Ca++ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ca2+-channel 
 
T-Type- 
calcium 
 
channel blocker 
ethosuximide, 
(valproic acid) 
 
GABAa- 
receptor 
 
Cl– 
 
 
NMDA- 
 
receptor 
 
NMDA-receptor- 
antagonist 
felbamate, 
 
valproic acid 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GABA 
 
 
 
 
Inhibitory 
neuron 
 
Excitatory neuron 
 
Inhibition of 
Glutamate 
glutamate 
release: 
phenytoin, 
lamotrigine 
phenobarbital 
 
 
 
 
Voltage 
dependent 
 
Na+-channel Enhanced 
inactivation: 
 
carbamazepine 
valproic acid 
 
phenytoin 
 
Gabamimetics: 
benzodiazepine 
barbiturates 
vigabatrin 
tiagabine 
gabapentin 
 
Fig. 10.7. Sites of action of antiepileptic drugs (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
 
Benzodiazepins and phenobarbital increase the inhibition by the release 
of physiological amounts of GABA and its interaction with GABAA 
receptors of chloride channels. 
 
 
Valproic acid decreases GABA catabolism by the inhibition of GABA 
transaminase. 
 
 
Other preparations realize their actioin by antagonism to glutamate, a 
direct GABA-mimetic action, regulation of GABA re-uptake. 
 
PHENYTOIN 
 
 
is taken orally, is quickly absorbed in the GI tract, is metabolized in the 
liver, stays in the organism for a long time, is excreted by urine and bile, 
accumulates 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
promotes carrying out Na+ from neurons; decreases the Ca++ contain and 
energy processes in the epileptic focal area; increases GABA concentra-
tion, as a result, suppresses the induction and irradiation of excitement in 
the motor areas in the brain 
 
 
has an anti-epileptic action; an anti-arrhythmic action; a weak sedative action 
 
 
is used in epilepsy with grand mal, tachyarrhythmia (especially in acute 
poisoning with cardiac glycosides), Menier’s disease 
 
may cause side-effects, such as vertigo, ataxia, tremor, nystagmus, 
diplopia, respiratory disturbances, an increase of the body temperature, 
skin rash, hyperplastic gingivitis. 
  
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Carbamazepine is the agonist of benzodiazepine receptors of CL- ion 
channels; has anti-epileptic and anxiolytic effects, decrease pain syndromes and 
vestibular disturbances; is indicated in epilepsy with grand mal, petit mal, mixed 
forms, hyper-kinesis, neuralgia of n.trigeminus, Menier’s disease; may cause 
nausea, vomiting, drowsiness, ataxia, accomodation disturbances. 
 
Clonazepam suppresses generalized seizures more than focal. It binds to the 
benzodiazepine site of the GABAA receptor, which increases its sensitivity to 
GABA, reducing the excitability of neurons. It is used for epilepsy with focal and 
general-ized seizures, absences (typical and atypical small epileptic attack), panic 
disorder, phobias, bipolar disease, and hyperkinesia. Like other benzodiazepines 
group, clon-azepam has sedative, anxiolytic, and central myorelaxing effect. 
 
Sodium valproate (or valpoic acid) inhibits GABA transaminase and 
produces accumulation of GABA in brain, is used for treatment of grand mal, petit 
mal, mixed and local forms of epilepsy; has such side effects as drowsiness, 
ataxia, dyspepsia, decreasing of blood coagulation. 
 
Lamotrigine enhances the action of GABA in the CNS and inhibits the release of 
glutamate and aspartate. It is a first-line drug for primary generalised tonic-clonic 
seizures, an adjuvant therapy in partial seizures, and an alternative drug for absences. 
Other indications include bipolar disorder, peripheral neuropathy, trigeminal neural-
gia, cluster headaches, and migraines. Side effects are life-threatening skin reactions, 
loss of balance or coordination; vision disturbances, dizziness, drowsiness, insomnia, 
anxiety, memory problems, mood changes; dry mouth, itch, cough; nausea, abdominal 
pain, weight loss and dysmenorrhea. 
 
PREPARATIONS FOR EMERGENCY 

HELP IN A SEIZURES ATTACK 
 
 
Diazepam (IV or IM ) 
 
 
Sodium oxibutyrate (IV or IM) 
 
 
Magnesium sulfate (IV or IM) 
 
 
Chloral hydrate (rectally) 
 
 
Tubocurarine (IV,under the conditions of artificial lungs ventilation) 
 
 
General anesthesia by halothane. 
 
PARKINSON’S DISEASE AND ITS PHARMACOTHERAPY 
 
The main signs of Parkinson’s disease are tremor, muscular rigidity, hypoki-
nesia, hypersalivation. The main disorders in CNS are lesions in striatum resulting 
in the diminished amount of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra. This 
leads to the onset of dopamine/acetylcholine imbalance (fig. 10.8). 
 
The ways of the pharmacological management of Parkinson’s disease are: 
 
 
The stimulation of dopaminergic processes with 
 
–  Levodopa 
 
–  Nacom 
 
–  Madopar 
 
–  Midantan 
 
–  Selegelin 
 
 Inhibition of central cholinergic processes by 
 
–  Trihexyphenidyl (cyclodol.) 
 
 
 
Normal state 
 
 
Dopamine 
 
Acetylcholine 
Dopamine 
deficiency 
Predominance 
Parkinson's disease 
of acetylcholine 
 
Fig. 10.8. Main disorders in CNS resulting in Parkinson’s disease 
 
(by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 

118 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Levodopa is the precursor of dopamine (fig. 10.9). It is administered with the 
pur-pose to replenish the dopamine deficiency in specific regions of the brain. 
Dopamine itself does not cross the blood-brain barrier but levodopa is actively 
transported into the CNS and is converted to dopamine in the brain. Large doses of 
levodopa are required, because much of the drug is decarboxylated to dopamine in 
the periphery, resulting in side effects. Levodopa avoids hypokinesia; has a little 
action on muscles regidity and tremor and is used for the treatment of Parkinson’s 
disease. It may cause dyspepsia, orthostatic hypotension, arrhythmia, psychic 
disturbances. It is significant to know the following drugs interactions observed 
during the intaking of levodopa: vitamin B6 decreases the effect of levodopa; 
MAO inhibitors administered together with levodopa may cause hypertension. 
 
Nacom is a combined preparation containing levodopa and carbidopa which 
decreases the metabolism of levodopa in peripheral tissues and enhances the effec-
tiveness of preparation (fig. 10.9). 
 
Madopar is combined remedy for the treatment of Parkinson's disease and rest-
less legs syndrome, contains levodopa and benserazide, an inhibitor of peripheral 
 
L-Dopa 
Carbidopa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inhibition of dopa- 
Dopamine precursor 
decarboxylase 
Amantadine 
Benzatropine 
NMDA 
receptor: 
Blockade 
of ionophore: 
attenuation 
of cholinergic 
neurons 
Acetylcholine antagonist 
 
Fig. 10.9. Chemical structure and mechanism of action of levodopa, 
 
carbidopa, midantan, and benzatropine (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 

Chapter 11.  NEUROLEPTICS. ANXIOLYTICS. SEDATIVES. LITHIUM SALTS 
119
 
decarboxylase; is used for fluctuations in the action of levodopa, depletion of the 
single dose effect, or an increase in the latent period before the onset of the 
clinical effect of this drug. 
 
Midantan blocks glutamate receptors in the cortex (fig. 10.9), decreases their 
influence on the neostriatum, protects neurons in substantia nigra, increases the 
sensitivity of dopamine receptors to the mediator; avoids hypokinesia and muscles 
regidity; has antiviral activity: is used for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease and 
symptomatic parkinsonism; may cause such side-effects as insomnia, 
hallucinations, headache, orthostatic hypotension, dyspepsia. 
 
Selegiline is a selective irreversible MAO-B inhibitor. preventing 
degradation of dopamine in some areas of the brain. It is used to reduce symptoms 
in early-stage Parkinson's disease and depression. Side effects include nausea, 
hallucinations, confusion, depression, loss of balance, insomnia, agitation, 
arrhythmia, bradycar-dia, hypertension, angina pectoris, and syncope. Due to the 
structural similarity to amphetamine, selegiline is a controlled substance. 
 
Trihexyphenidy (cyclodol) blocks cholinoreceptors in basal ganglia of the 
brain; avoids hypokinesia, regidity, and hypersalivation; is used for treatment of 
Parkinson’s disease and symptomatic parkinsonism; may cause peripheral M-
cholinoblocking action. Benzatropine has similar mechanism of action (fig.10.9). 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Hypnotic with benzodiazepine structure is only: 
 
 
Phenobarbital 
 
 
Zolpidem 
 
 
Zopiclon 
 
 
Thiopental sodium 
 
 
Nitrazepam. 
 
№2. The concentration of ethanol for IV administration in cachexia is: 
 
 
40% 
 
 
96% 
 
 
70% 
 
 
Absolute ethanol 
 
 
20%. 
 
№3. Phenytoin exerts the following useful effects: 
 
A. Anti-epileptic 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Gum hypertrophy 
 
 
Coarsening of facial features 
 
 
Hyperglycemia 
 
 
Anti-arrhythmic. 
 
 
№4. Ethanol is: 
 
 
A long acting general anesthetic 
 
 
A neuronal depressant with local antimicrobial action 
 
 
Causing acute and chronic poisonings 
 
 
Is used mainly as antiseptic 
 
 
Used for short operations in a polyclinic. 
 
№5. An antiparkinsonian drug influencing dopaminergic processes in basal 
ganglia of the brain was prescribed to patient suffering from Parkinson’s 
disease. It is known, that this preparation also has antiviral activity and 
may be used for the prophylaxis of influenza. Which of the listed drugs 
was prescribed? 
 
 Levodopa 
 
 Nacom 
 
 Cyclodol 
 
 Amantadine (midantan) 
 
 Carbidopa. 
 
Answers: 
 
№ 1 – E; № 2 – E ; № 3 – A, C, E; № 4 – B, C, D; №5 – D. 

Chapter 11.  NEUROLEPTICS. ANXIOLYTICS. SEDATIVES. LITHIUM SALTS 
121
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter
 
 
 
 
11 NEUROLEPTICS. 
ANXIOLYTICS. 
 
SEDATIVES. LITHIUM SALTS 
 
 
 
 
PSYCHOTROPIC DRUGS 
 
Neuroleptics, anxiolytics, and sedatives are drugs for the treatment of 
psychic disorders of different severity. Neuroleptics (major tranquilizers) are the 
strongest among these preparations and have an antipsychotic action (fig.11.1). 
Anxiolytics (minor tranquilizers) are characterized by anxiolytic and sedative 
effects. Sedative drugs are the least potent and have only a sedative effect. Lithium 
salts are specific agents to treat mania. 
 
ANTIPSYCHOTIC DRUGS 
 
 
PSYCHOTROPIC DRUGS 
 
 
 
NEUROLEPTICS 
ANXIOLYTICS 
SEDATIVES 
 
 
Antipsychotic action 
Anxiolytic action 
Anxiolytic action 
Sedative action 
Sedative action 
Sedative action 
 
Fig. 11.1. Main groups of psychotropic drugs and their potency. 

122 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
SCHIZOPHRENIA 
 
Schizophrenia is the type of psychosis characterized by delusions, hallucina-
tions, thinking and speech disturbances. The illness often initially affects people 
during adolescence and is a chronic and disabling disorder. It has genetic 
component and reflects some biochemical abnormality in the brain, possibly the 
overactivity of the mesolimbic dopaminergic neurons. 
 
NEUROLEPTICS 
 
Neuroleptics are drugs which are used to treat schizophrenia and some other 
psychotic states, such as manic states and delirium. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Typical neuroleptics 
 
 
Phenothiazines 
 
–  Chlorpromazine (Aminazinum) 
 
–  Trifluoperazine (Triftazinum) 
 
–  Flunazine (Phthorphenazinum) 
 
 
Butyrophenones 
 
–  Haloperidol 
 
–  Droperidol 
 
 
Thioxanthenes 
 
–  Chlorprothixene 
 
B. Atypical neuroleptics 
 
 
Dibenxzodiazepines 
 
–  Clozapine 
 
 
Benzamides 
 
–  Sulpiride. 
 
 Benzisoxazoles 
 
–Risperidone 
 
DISTINGUISHES BETWEEN 
 
TYPICAL AND ATYPICAL NEUROLEPTICS 
 
Typical neuroleptics block D2-, D1-, D3- and D4-dopamine receptors; cause 
extrapyramidal disturbances (drug parkinsonism) 

Chapter 11.  NEUROLEPTICS. ANXIOLYTICS. SEDATIVES. LITHIUM SALTS 
123
 
Atypical neuroleptics block 5-HT2- receptors, α2-adrenoceptors, D4-
dopamine receptors, have a weak action on D2-dopamine receptors, do not cause 
extrapyramidal disturbances. 
 
CHLORPROMAZINE (AMINAZINUM) 
 
The drug is a phenothiazine derivative (fig. 11.2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 11.2. Chemical structure of chlorpromazine. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, IM, IV 
 
is absorbed in the GI tract, but absoption is poor 
 
maximal concentration is determined in 2-4 hrs 
 
penetrates CNS and placenta 
 
binds to albumins in the blood plasma (95-98%) 
 
is metabolized in the liver 
 
is the inductor of microsomal oxidation 
 
is excreted by urine, bile, and mother’s milk 
 
acts during 6-8 hrs, T ½ = 30 hrs 
 
accumulates. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Chlorpromasine blocks dopamine receptors; exerts preference for D 2-
dopamine receptors, prevents the interaction of dopamine with a receptor, 
decreases an intracel-lular response (fig. 11.3). 
 
It also blocks serotonin receptors, cholinergic receptors, α-adrenoceptors, H1-
histamine receptors (fig. 11.4). 
 
Chlorpromazine acts in the mesolimbic system, hypothalamus, extrapyramidal 
system, trigger zone of the emetic center, ascending reticular system of the brain. It has 
a peripheral action (antimuscarinic, anti-adrenergic, and antihistamine). 

124 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
Dopamine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Neuroleptic 
 
drugs 
Dopamine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dopamine 
 
receptor blocked 
 
 
DECREASED 
INTRACELLULAR 
RESPONSE 
 
Fig. 11.3. Dopamine-blocking mechanism of 
action of neuroleptics (by R.Finkel et al., 
2008). 
 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
an antipsychotic action (a 
decrease in hallucinations 
and agitation) 
 
 
an anxiolytic action (a de-
crease in anxiety and stress) 
 
 
a sedative action (a 
decrease in restlessness) 
 
a decrease in psycho-motor 
excitement 
 
ahypnotic action 
 
 
an anti-seizure action 
 
 
cataleptic effect (absence 
of active movements under 
the 
conditions 
of 
the 
normal muscle tone) 
 
 
an anti-emetic action (a de-
crease in nausea and vomit-
ing caused by cancer chemo-
therapy or radiation) 
 
 
an antihypertensive effect 
 
 
hypothermia and poikilo-
thermia (lowering in high 
body temperature, as well 
as normal temperature) 
 
 
a potentiative action 
 
 
weak anti-inflammatory 
and anti-allergic actions 

Chapter 11.  NEUROLEPTICS. ANXIOLYTICS. SEDATIVES. LITHIUM SALTS 
125
 
 
CHLORPROMAZINE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dopamine 
α-adreno- 
serotonin 
H1-histamine 
M-cholino- 
recepto 
ceptor 
receptor 
receptor 
receptor 
 
Fig. 11.4. Receptors which are blocked by chlorpromazine. 
 
Indications 
 
h                                               
sychosis, schizophrenia 
 
h                                               
sycho-motor excitement 
 
h                                               
eizures attack 
 
h                                               
remedication 
 
h                                               
evere vomiting of central origin 
 
h                                               
ypertensive crisis 
 
h                                               
yperthermia 
 
h                                               
ibernation (a decrease in normal body temperature during surgeries on 
the brain or on the heart) 
h                                               
ombined therapy of pain syndromes 
 
h                                               
kin diseases accompanied by severe itch. 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Irritation in the place of injection 
1. Diseases of the liver and 
2. Pain in the stomach 
kidney 
3. Irritation of the skin and mucous membranes 
2. Diseases of blood 
4. Confusion, blurred vision, dry mouth, hyposecretion 
3. Hypothyroidism 
in the stomach, constipation, urinary retention (due to 
4. Thromboembolism 
M-cholinoblockage) 
5. Organic diseases of the 

5. Hypotension, orthostatic reactions, lightheadedness 
brain and spinal cord 
(due to the blockage of α-adrenoceptors) 
(trauma, cancer, insult) 
6. Liver lesions, icterus 
6. Gastric ulcer 
 
Inhibiting in hemopoiesis (leukopenia, agranulocytosis) 7.  Pregnancy and lactation. 
 
 
Dermatitis, phototoxicity 
 
 
Parkinsonian symptoms, such as akathisia and tardive 
dyskinesia 
(due 
to 
the 
blockage 
of 
dopaminoreceptors in the nigrostriatal pathway) 
 
 
Neuroleptic syndrome (apathy, depression, parkinsonism) 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
The aggravation of acute agitation 
accompanying withdrawal from alcohol 
 
The aggravation of epilepsy 
 
 
Amenorrhea, galactorrhea, infertility, impotence (due 
to the depression of hypothalamus) 
 
Allergy 
 
 
Tolerance. 
 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Typical neuroleptics 
 
Trifluorperazine (Triftazinum) contains fluorine; is more active in its anti-
emetic action and in the influence on the extrapyramidal system; is less active in 
potentiation, anti-seizure, and antihistamine actions; may cause sedative or 
stimulating effect according to the form of the disease. 
 
Flunazine (Phthorphenazinum) contains fluorine; has strong antipsychotic 
and anti-emetic actions; manifests a stimulating action in lower doses and a 
sedative action in bigger doses; is effective for the treatment of long durative 
schizophrenia; may be used in neurosis (lower doses). 
 
Haloperidol is from butyrophenone derivatives; has strong antipsychotic, po-
tentiative, anti-emetic and sedative actions, denominated catalepsy; is effective for 
the treatment of acute psychosis; may be used for neuroleptanalgesia; often causes 
extrapyramidal disturbances. 
 
Droperidol has a strong and short action; has no cholinoblocking activity; has 
anti-shock, anti-arrhythmic, antihypertensive actions; strong catalepsy; is used for 
neuroleptanalgesia, before, during and after operations, in shock and myocardial 
infarction. 
 
Chlorprothixene is a thioxanthene derivative; has a sedative action, decreases 
depression; has weak anti-seizure effect; does not cause catalepsy; is used in psy-
choses accompanied by depression, in neurosis (lower doses). 
 
Atypical neuroleptics 
 
Clozapine (Asaleptin) has an antipsychotic action with sedation; does not 
cause catalepsy and extrapyramidal disturbances; does not cause apathy; is 
effective in the resistance to other preparations. 
 
Sulpiride has a strong anti-emetic action and a weak cataleptic action; has no 
sedative, anti-seizure and potentiative effects; has an antidepressive action; is used 
for the treatment of psychic diseases accompanied by apathy, as well as of psycho-
somatic diseases. 

Chapter 11.  NEUROLEPTICS. ANXIOLYTICS. SEDATIVES. LITHIUM SALTS 
127
 
CONCEPT ABOUT NEUROLEPTANALGESIA 
 
Neuroleptanalgesia is the kind of general anesthesia when neuroleptic 
(droperi-dol) and narcotic analgesic (fentanyl) are administered together (IV). In 
this case neuroleptic produces psychic suppression and a narcotic analgesic causes 
abolishing of pain. Co-administered, they display a synergic action. 
 
ANTI-ANXIETY DRUGS 
 
ANXIETY 
 
Anxiety is the state of tension, apprehension or uneasiness. The symptoms of 
severe anxiety are mental disturbances accompanied by tachycardia, sweating, 
trembling, palpitation. Episodes of mild anxiety are common life experiences and 
do not warrant treatment. The symptoms of severe or chronic anxiety may be 
treated with anti-anxiety drugs. 
 
ANXIOLYTICS 
 
Anxiolytics are drugs to treat anxiety and stress. They are also named minor 
tranquilizers, ataractics. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 
Benzodiazepines 
 
–  Chlordiazepoxide (Chlosepidum) 
 
–  Diazepam (Sibasonum) 
 
–  Phenazepam 
 
–  Medazepam (Mezapam, Rudotel) 
 
–  Gidazepam 
 
 
Preparations of another chemical structure 
 
–  Buspirone 
 
–  Benactyzime (Amizilum) 
 
– Meprobamate (Meprotanum). 
Antagonist of benzodiazepines is Flumazenil. 
 
CLORDIAZEPOXIDE 
 
The drug is a benzodiazepine derivative (fig. 11.5). 

128 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 11.5. Chemical structure of chlordiazepoxide. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, IM, IV 
 
 
is absorbed in the GI tract 
 
 
penetrates CNS 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver 
 
 
is excreted by urine 
 
 
has a long-durative action, T½= 24-48 hrs. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Benzodiazepine-receptor is the part of the benzodiazepine-GABA-
chloride ion channel complex. 
 
 
The drug binds to benzodiazepine receptors of Cl– ion channels and opens 
them (fig. 11.6). 
 
 
Cl– ions entry is increased that leads to hyperpolarization of cell membranes. 
Depolarization gets worse and decreasing of neurons excitement in the limbic 
system and midbrain developes. It results in an anxiolytic action. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 An anxiolytic action (a decrease in anxiety, panic, and stress) 
 
 A sedative action 
 
 A hypnotic action 
 
 A central myorelaxative action (due to action on spinal polysynaptic reflexes) 
 
 An anti-seizure action 
 
 A potentiative action (a drug addition, if analgesics, general anesthetics, or 
other CNS inhibitors are administered together with this drug). 

Chapter 11.  NEUROLEPTICS. ANXIOLYTICS. SEDATIVES. LITHIUM SALTS 
129
 
Chlordiazepoxide 
Inhibition of 
GABA= 
excitation 
γ-amino- 
butryc acid 
Hyper- 
Benzodiazepine 
polari- 
receptor 
zation 
Chloride 
GABA 
Cl-  
ionophore 
  
GABA-receptor 
 
GABA-gated Cl--channel 
 
Fig. 11.6. Mechanism of action of chlordiazepoxide (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Indications 
 
 
Neuroses 
 
 
Stress, emotional overstrain 
 
 
Sleeping disorders induced by emotional overstrain 
 
 
Neurological diseases with muscle spasticity 
 
 
Seizures 
 
 
Abstinence in chronic alcoholics 
 
 
Psychosomatic diseases 
 
 
Premedication. 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Weakness 
1. Jobs that needs increased attention 
2. Drowsiness 
2. Myasthenia 
3. A decrease in attention and rapidness of 
3. Diseases of the liver and kidney 
motor reactions 
4. Pregnancy. 
 
Ataxia 
 
 
Skin itch 
 
 
Amenorrhea 
 
 
Impotence 
 
 
Drug addition 
 
 
Drug dependence. 

130 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Diazepam (Sibazonum) is administered orally, IM, IV; maximal 
concentration after oral administration develops in 30-90 min; elimination is 
characterized by two phases (the 1st short phase with distribution of the drug in 
tissues during 3 hrs and the 2nd long-lasting phase with T½= 48 hrs); is more 
potent than clordiazepoxide, especially in an anti-seizure effect; causes a decrease 
in night gastric secretion and arrhythmia; is suitable to treat a seizure attack; may 
be used in combined therapy of ulcerative disease and heart arrhythmia. 
 
Phenazepam is administered orally; maximal concentration is in 1-2 hrs; has 
T½ = 6-10 hrs; is stronger than clordiazepoxide or diazepam; has a strong 
hypnotic action and muscle relaxation. 
 
Medazepam is taken orally; is less potent, but does not cause hypnotic effect 
and myorelaxation (so named “day-time” tranquilizer); may be used in patients 
who need increased attention for their jobs. 
 
Gidazepam is “day-time” tranquilizer; is taken by mouth; begins to act in 
30-60 min and acts during 1-4 hrs; has T½ = 87 hrs; has an anxiolytic action, 
psychostimu-lating and antidepressant effects; has not a hypnotic effect; is well 
tolerated; is used to treat neuroses accompanied by asthenia and depression. 
 
CONCEPT ABOUT ATARACTANALGESIA 
 
The ataractanalgesia is the kind of general anesthesia when the tranquilizer 
and the narcotic analgesic are administered together (IV). 
 
SEDATIVES 
 
Sedatives are the drugs to treat restlessness and light forms of anxiety. 
Classification 
 
Non-organic preparations 
 
–  Sodium bromide 
 
–  Potassium bromide 
 
 
Vegetable preparations 
 
–  Tincture from valerian 
 
– Tincture from Leonurum 
3. Metabolic sedatives 
– Melatonin 
 
– Glicised 

Chapter 11.  NEUROLEPTICS. ANXIOLYTICS. SEDATIVES. LITHIUM SALTS 
131
 
 Combined preparations 
 
– Corvalolum 
 
– Valocormidum. 
 
– Persen 
 
– Novo-Passit 
 
SODIUM BROMIDE 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally in the form of solution or mixture 
 
 
quickly penetrates CNS 
 
 
is excreted by urine, saliva, and sweat 
 
 
excretion depends on the concentration of chloride-ions in blood plasma 
 
 
accumulates in the body. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
It increases inhibition in CNS. 
 
 
Effective dose depends on the type of higher nervous activity. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
  a sedative action (a decrease in restlessness and anxiety) 
 
  a hypnotic action 
 
  an anti-epileptic action. 
 
Indications 
 
  Light forms of neuroses, neurasthenia, hysteria 
 
  Restlessness 
 
  Insomnia 
 
  Epilepsy 
 
  Light forms of hypertension. 
 
Side-effects 
 
The accumulation of bromides results in bromism. 
 
Main signs: 
 
–– drowsiness, weakness, apathy, memory disturbances 
 
–– skin rash 
 
–– rhinitis 

132 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
–– cough. 
 
Treatment: 
 
–– to drink much liquid 
 
–– sodium chloride with meals 
 
–– diuretics, especially ethacrynic acid. 
 
VEGETABLE PREPARATIONS 
 
Sedatives of vegetable origin are galenic preparations from medicinal plants, 
such as Valeriana, Leonurum and some other plants (fig. 11.7). 
They have common pharmacological properties: 
  are taken orally 
  the mechanism of action is not known 
  the main effects are sedative, hypnotic, spasmolytic 
  the indications to use are light forms of neurosis, neurasthenia, insomnia, 
cardioneurosis, somatic diseases with neurotic syndrome, spasms of 
stomach and intestine. 
 
 
A 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 11.7. Medicinal plants containing sedatives: 
 
A – Valeriana; B – Leonurum. 

Chapter 11.  NEUROLEPTICS. ANXIOLYTICS. SEDATIVES. LITHIUM SALTS 
133
 
METABOLIC SEDATIVES 
 
Melatonin is a hormone produced by the pineal gland and regulating 
circadian rhythms through activation of melatonin receptors and having an 
antioxidant ac-tion. As a medicine, it is used for the treatment of insomnia, jet lag 
and shift work, headaches, protection from radiation. Side effects are minimal. 
Glycised has a mild sedative, anti-anxiety, nootropic and antitoxic action. The 
active component of the preparation is the amino acid glycine, which participates in 
the neurotransmission in glycinergic and GABA-ergic synapses as well as in the 
synthesis of proteins, phospholipids etc. The greatest bioavailability is observed with 
sublingual administration. The drug is used for asthenia, neurocirculatory dystonia, 
alcohol abstinence. improvement of memory and education, psychoemotional stress, 
depression, sleep disorders, increased irritability. It well tolerated by patients 
 
COMBINED SEDATIVE PREPARATIONS 
 
Corvalolum is mixture for oral administration (drops for taking inside), 
contains ethylic ester of bromine-isovalerianic acid, 2% of phenobarbital, 3% of 
mint oil, sodium hydroxide, alcohol, and water; has sedative, spasmolytic, and 
light hypnotic action; is used in neuroses, spasms of coronary blood vessels, 
tachycardia, spasms in the gut. 
 
Valocormidum contains tincture from valerian, tincture from the lily of the 
valley, tincture from Belladonna, sodium bromide, menthol, and distil water; is 
used in neuroses accompanied by bradycardia. 
Persen is made on the basis of plant extracts of valerian (Valeriana), lemon 
balm (Melissa) and peppermint (Mentha piperita), which have a mild sedative ef-
fect; It is used for light neuroses, after the abolition of potent sedatives; vascular 
dystonia and stress. 
Novo-Passit is a combined preparation consisting of extracts of medicinal plants 
and guaifenesin; has sedative, anxiolytic and spasmolytic effects; is used for mild 
forms of neurasthenia and sleep disorders; headaches caused by nervous tension; 
climacteric syndrome; functional diseases of the GI tract and cardio-vascular system. 
 
DRUGS USED TO TREAT MANIA 

134 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
MANIA AND BIPOLAR (MANIC-DEPRESSIVE) DISORDER 
 
Mania is an affective disorder characterized by elevated, expansive, or irrita-
ble mood, accompanied by increased activity, pressure of speech, flight of ideas, 
decreased need for sleep, distractibility, or involvement in activities that have high 
potential for painful consequences. Patients that cycle between depression and 
mania have the diagnosis of bipolar affective disorder. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
  
Lithium salts 
 
–  Lithium carbonate 
 
–  Lithium oxibutyrate 
 
  
Other preparations 
 
–  Carbamazepine 
 
–  Clonazepam 
 
–  Valproic acid. 
 
LITHIUM CARBONATE 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
  is taken orally 
 
  is absorbed in the gut completely, but absorption lasts during 8 hrs 
 
  maximal concentration develops in 2-4 hrs 
 
  does not bind to plasma proteins 
 
  95% of the dose is excreted with urine and 5% – with sweat 
 
  T½ = 19 hrs 
 
  therapeutic effect developes in 1-3 weeks after the start of the treatment. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
  Lithium disturbs sodium transport and in such a way inhibits Ca-dependent 
liberation of norepinephrine and dopamine in synapses of the brain. 
  Lithium salt also inhibits the re-uptake of norepinephrine and dopamine. 
 
  At the same time it does not influence serotonin. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
  a decrease in manic behavior 

Chapter 11.  NEUROLEPTICS. ANXIOLYTICS. SEDATIVES. LITHIUM SALTS 
135
 
  the stabilization of mood, reduce in frequency and magnitude of mood 
swings 
  the prevention of phase of mania in patients with bipolar disorder. 
 
Indications 
 
  Bipolar affective disorder (manic-depressive disease) 
 
  Manias 
 
Side-effects 
 
  Weakness, tremor, ataxia, pseudotumor of the brain, hyperreflexia, 
extrapy-ramidal disturbances, headache, vision disturbances 
  Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, an increase in size of 
salivary glands, dry mouth 
  Renal dysfunction (glucosuria, proteinuria, creatinuria) 
 
  Thyroid enlargement, hypo- or hyperthyroidism 
 
  Skin rash 
 
  Teratogenous action (congenital cardiac anomalies). 
 
A small therapeutic index of the drug necessitates frequent monitoring of the 
lithium level in blood serum. 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Only one preparation in the list belongs to “day-time” tranquilizers: 
 
 
Chlorpromazepine 
 
 
Chlorprothixene 
 
 
Chlordiazepoxide 
 
 
Gidazepam 
 
 
Diazepam. 
 
№2. All of the following are observed in patients taking neuroleptics, except: 
 
 
Increased BP 
 
 
Orthostatic hypotension 
 
 
Parkinsonian symptoms 
 
 
Altered endocrine function 
 
 
Phototoxicity. 
 
№3. Anxiolytics: 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Are the drugs to treat a manic-depressive disorder 
 
 
Are the drugs to treat panic and phobia 
 
 
Bind to dopamine receptors in the brain 
 
 
Bind to benzodiazepine receptors of chloride ion channels 
 
 
Act in the limbic system, midbrain, and hypothalamus. 
 
 
№4. Lithium salts are characterized by: 
 
 
Complete and durative absorption in the gut 
 
 
Competition with sodium in cells of the brain 
 
 
A small therapeutic index 
 
 
Minimal side-effects and low toxicity 
 
 
The ability to prevent neurosis. 
 
№5. A 60 year-old woman addressed her doctor complaining of side-effects 
which 
appeared 
during 
the 
treatment 
with 
chlorpromazine 
(Aminazinum). She was troubled with tremor and disturbances of 
movements. What is the mechanism of these side-effects? 
 
 
The activation of hyppocampus 
 
 
The inhibition of reticular formation (α1-adrenoceptors) 
 
The inhibition of neostriatum (D2-receptors) 
 
The inhibition of hypothalamus 
 
 
The inhibition of neocortex. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – D; № 2 – A; № 3 – B, D, E; № 4 – A, B, C; № 5 – C. 

Chapter 12.  OPIOID (NARCOTIC) ANALGESICS 
137
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 OPIOID (NARCOTIC) 
ANALGESICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAIN SENSATION AND LIMITATION OF PAIN 
 
Nociception 
 
Pain is a signal about the danger for the organism. At the same time, it causes 
discomfort, decreases the quality of life, may be unbearable, may cause a pain shock. 
 
Nociception is pain sensation. It includes sensative nerve endings, afferent 
nerves, afferent pathways in the spinal cord, thalamus, and the cortex of the brain 
(fig. 12.1). 
 
Thalamus is the main collector of pain impulses. Strong nociceptive stimuli 
irradiates on the medulla of the brain resulting in a pain shock. 
 
Nociception is realized in the following way. Nociceptive terminals of primary 
sensory neurons are stimulated by noxious stimuli. Action potentials are generated, 
pass along the peripheral afferent sensory fiber and arrive at junctions between the 
peripheral afferent fibers and the spinal cord neurons in the dorsal horn. The ar-rival of 
the action potentials causes the opening of voltage-gated Ca++channels in the pre-
synaptic membrane. An increased influx of Ca++ causes vesicles containing 

 
Cerebrum 
 
Somatic sensory 
  
cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hypothalamus 
 
Periaqueductal gray 
 
matter 
 
Midbrain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mid-medulla 
Nuclei in rostral 
ventral medulla 
Raphe 
nuclei 
 
Cervical 
 
spinal cord 
Dorsal horn 
neurons 
 
Fig. 12.1. Anatomy structures connected with nociception 
 
(http://www.picsearch.com). 

neurotransmitter to release their contents into the synaptic gap. Neurotransmitters 
(glutamate, substance P) bind to receptors on the postsynaptic membrane. 
Activation of such receptors enables the efflux of K+ and influx of Ca++ and Na+ 
into the post-synaptic cell that leads to the transmission of impulses along the 
axons of the spinal cord neurons to the brain. Information about pain is received 
and processed by higher centers in the brain and the individual perceives pain. 
 
Antinociception 
 
Antinociception is the limitation of pain in the body. It is realized by opioid 
receptors and their ligands. 
The main subtypes of opioid receptors are mu (μ)- , kappa (κ)-, sigma (σ), 
delta (δ)-receptors (fig. 12.2). 
  
OPIOID 
 
RECEPTORS 
 
 
 
Mu (µ) opioid receptor: 
Kappa (k) opioid 
Sigma (σ) opioid 
– 
supraspinal analgesia 
receptor: 
receptors: 
– 
sedation, euphoria 
– 
spinal analgesia 
– 
dysphoria 
– 
physical dependence 
– 
sedation, dys- 
– 
hallucinations 
–  depression of respira- 
phoria 
– 
psychotomimetic 
tion 
– 
pupil constric- 
effect 
– 
decreased Gl motility 
tion 
– 
pupil dilation 
– 
pupil constriction 
 
Fig. 12.2. Subtypes of opioid receptors and processes mediated by them. 
 
They are located in CNS (brainstem, medial thalamus, spinal cord, hypothala-
mus, limbic system), sensory nerve fibers and their terminals. Opioid receptors are 
also located in peripheral tissues (myocardium, GI tract, immune organs, bones). 
 
Ligands of opioid receptors are endorphins, enkephalins, dynorphins. 
 
Opioid receptors take part in the limitation of pain, limitation of stress, regula-
tion of sleeping, and emotional behavior. They mediate respiration, cough, nausea, 
vomiting, maintenance of BP, pupillary diameter, stomach secretion (fig. 12.2). 
 
The stimulation of opioid receptors results in the inhibition of adenyl cyclase 
and a decrease in the cAMP content. Coupling of receptors to G-proteins of K+ 
chan-nels leads to the opening of channels and hyperpolarisation. Coupling to G-
proteins of Ca++ channels leads to the inhibition of these channels and a decrease 
in the Ca++ influx (fig. 12.3). 

140 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
To reduce the level of perceived pain, endogenous opioids are released by in-
terneurons in the dorsal horn in response to severe or persistent pain. The opioids 
bind to G proteins associated with μ type opioid receptors, with the following 
results: the inhibition of the presynaptic release of glutamate and an increased K+ 
conductance across the postsynaptic membrane. These events prevent the 
transmission of pain to the higher centers (fig. 12.3). 
 
To combat the severe pain, the administration of exogenous opioids (e.g. mor-
phine) mimics the effects of endogenous opioids at the μ opioid receptor (fig. 12.3). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 12.3. Mechanism of action of endogenous opioids, exogenous opioids (morphine) and 
their antagonists (naloxone) (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
OPIOID (NARCOTIC) ANALGESICS 
 
Analgesics are drugs reversibly and selectively inhibiting pain in the body 
without significant changing of consciousness. 

Chapter 12.  OPIOID (NARCOTIC) ANALGESICS 
141
 
There are two groups of analgesics: 
 
 
opioid (narcotic) analgesics 
 
 
non-opioid (non-narcotic) analgesics. 
 
Opioid analgesics are the drugs to relieve intense pain which mimic the 
action of endogenous opiopeptides and may cause drug dependence. 
The disparities between opioids regarding efficacy and potential for 
dependence reflect differing affinity and intrinsic activity profiles for the 
individual receptor subtypes. There are strong agonists of opioid receptors, partial 
agonists, and agonist-antagonists of these receptors. 
 
Strong agonists have high affinity for μ-receptors, varying affinities for δ- 
and κ- receptors and low affinity for σ-receptors. 
 
Partial antagonists have low intrinsic activity. 
 
Agonists-antagonists act as agonists on one subtype and as partial agonists or 
as pure antagonists on another. 
 
The abuse potential of narcotic analgesics is determined by kinetic 
properties, because development of drug dependence is connected with rapid 
build-up of the brain concentration. 
 
CLASSIFICATION OF OPIOID ANALGESICS 
 
AND THEIR ANTAGONISTS 
 
A. Strong agonists of opioid receptors 
 
 
Natural compounds 
 
–  Morphine hydrochloride 
 
–  Codeine phosphate 
 
–  Omnoponum 
 
 
Synthetic compounds 
 
–  Tremeperidine (Promedolum) 
 
–  Fentanyl 
 
B. Mixed agonists-antagonists and partial agonists of opioid receptors 
 
–  Pentazocine 
 
–  Buprenorphine 
 
–  Butorphanol 
 
–  Nalbuphine 
 
–  Nalorphine hydrochloride 
 
–  Tramadol hydrochloride 
 
 
Antagonists of opioid receptors 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
–  Naloxone hydrochloride 
 
–  Naltrexone. 
 
MORPHINE 
 
Morphine is an alkaloid of opium. Opium is a dried juice from unripe semen 
capsules of poppy (Papaver somniferum) (fig. 12.4). It contains more than 20 al-
kaloids. Among them there are phenanthrene derivatives (morphine, codeine) and 
isoquinoline derivatives (papaverine). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 12.4. Papaver somniferum containing morphine. 
 
Morphine is a phenanthrene derivative (fig. 12.5). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 12.5. Chemical structure of morphine. 

Chapter 12.  OPIOID (NARCOTIC) ANALGESICS 
143
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, SC, IM, IV, epidurally, intrathecally in the spinal cord 
 
 
penetrates the blood-brain barrier 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver by conjugation with the glucuronic acid 
 
 
is the inhibitor of the liver enzymes 
 
 
is excreted by gastric epithelium and absorbed once more 
 
 
finally is excreted with urine 
 
 
begins to act in 10-20 min after the injection or 20-30 min after the oral 
administration 
 
 
acts during 3-5 hrs. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Morphine stimulates all the types of opioid receptors. 
 
 
It has high affinity for μ-receptors and some action for other opioid 
recep-tors (fig.12.3). 
 
 
In such a way it suppresses neurotransmission in the nociceptive system 
that results in the rising of pain threshold in the spinal cord and altering 
of the brain perception of pain. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
analgesia (a decrease in all the kinds of pain; changes in perception of 
pain – sensation of pain is not unpleasant) 
 
 
euphoria (sense of well being), then sleep 
 
 
sedation 
 
 
potentiation of other drugs inhibiting CNS 
 
 
the inhibition of the respiratory center resulting in respiratory depression 
 
 
the inhibition of the tussive center resulting in a decrease of cough 
 
 
the inhibition of the vomiting center 
 
 
the inhibition of the thermoregulation center in hypothalamus 
 
 
the stimulation of the n. vagus center resulting in bradycardia 
 
 
the stimulation of the trigger zone of the emetic reflex that leads to 
vomiting in some patients after the 1st administration of morphine 
 
 
the stimulation of the n. oculomotorius center resulting in miosis 
 
 
the stimulation of vasopressin production 
 
 
the dilation of peripheral veins 
 
 
an increase in the tone of sphincters in the GI tract, bile and urinary pathways 
 
 
an increase in the tone of bronchi. 

144 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Indications 
 
 
Traumatic shock 
 
 
Myocardial infarction (together with atropine) 
 
 
Colic (together with atropine) 
 
 
Pain associated with cancer 
 
 
Pain after surgeries 
 
 
Pre-anesthetic medication 
 
 
Pulmonary edema 
 
 
Cough dangerous for life (the danger of pulmonary bleeding or pneumo- 
thorax). 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Depression of respiration 
1. Insufficience of respiration 
2. Sleeping 
2. Cranial trauma 
3. Euphoria 
3. Acute abdomen 
4. Vomiting 
4. Cachexia 
5. Hypotension 
5. Children till 3 (due to the higher 
6. Elevation of intracranial pressure 
sensitivity of the respiratory 
7. Constipation 
center to morphine in such pa- 
8. Tolerance (to the respiratory depressant, anal- 
tients) 
gesic, euphoric and sedative effects) 
6. Elderly patients after 65 years old 
9. Drug dependence. 
(due to an increased sensitivity of 
10. Changes in effects of other drugs acting on 
the respiratory center to mor- 
CNS. 
phine). 
 
Acute poisoning with morphine 
 
Signs: 
 
–– the state of sleep, unconsciousness 
 
–– the presence of reflexes 
 
–– normal muscular tone 
 
–– miosis 
 
–– bradycardia 
 
–– Cheyne-Stokes breath 
 
–– the retention of urination 
 
–– spasm of the intestine and bowel. 
 
Emergency help: 
 
–– The lavage of stomach by 0,5% solution of potassium permanganate 
 
–– Naloxone, IV (an antagonist of narcotic analgesics) 
 
–– Atropine (for a decrease in the vagal action of morphine). 

Chapter 12.  OPIOID (NARCOTIC) ANALGESICS 
145
 
Opiate abuse 
 
Opiate abuse is physical and psychical dependence on morphine (or other 
opioid analgesic). In opiate abuse, “smark” is self administered by an injection to 
achieve a faster peak concentration in the brain and an intense psychic effect. 
A quick abolishing of narcotic substance causes abstinence (insomnia, 
nausea, vomiting, spastic pains in the abdomen, joint pains). Abstinence results 
from a back-cross decrease in the synthesis of endogenous ligands of opioid 
receptors during a long-term use of exogenous opioids. 
 
Compositions of naltrexone with buprenorphine, as well as antibodies to mor-
phine are used to treat opiate abuse. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
OMNOPONUM 
 
 
is the mixture of opium alkaloids 
 
 
contains 50% of morphine and 50% of codeine, papaverine, thebaine and 
other alkaloids 
 
 
is administered orally, SC 
 
 
is less active than morphine 
 
 
does not cause spasms in the GI tract. 
 
CODEINE 
 
 
an is opium alkaloid; is taken orally 
 
 
is less potent analgesic than morphine; is an active inhibitor of the tussive 
center at doses that do not cause analgesia; potentiates the action of sedative 
drugs and analgesics; produces less euphoria, less respiratory suppression, 
and less disturbances of the GI tract functions; has lower abuse potential 
 
 
is used as antitussive and as an ingredient of combined analgesic or seda-
tive drugs 
 
 
may cause suppression of respiration, constipation, tolerance, drug 
depend-ence. 
 
TRIMEPIRIDINE (PROMEDOLUM) 
 
 
is a synthetic preparation with a structure unrelated to morphine 
 
 
is administered orally, SC, IM, IV; begins to act in 10 min after IV 
admin-istration and acts during 3-4 hrs 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
yields morphine in 2-4 times on analgesic activity; causes less inhibition 
of the respiratory center, less stimulation of the n.vagus and emetic 
centers; has spasmolytic action on the GI tract; stimulates uterus 
contractions without a negative influence on the fetus 
 
is indicated in acute severe pains, premedication, myocardial infarction, 
colic, labor. 
  
FENTANYL 
 
 
is a synthetic preparation with a structure unrelated to morphine 
 
 
is administered IV, IM; action begins 1-3 min after the administration 
and lasts 15-30 min 
 
exceeds morphine in 100-400 times; when combined with droperidol it 
produces dissociative anesthesia 
 
is used for neuroleptanalgesia, premedication, analgesia in myocardial 
infarction, colic 
 
may cause such side-effects as suppression of respiration, motor excitement, 
rigidity of muscles of the chest and extremities, hypotension, bradycardia, an 
increase in blood pressure in the small cycle of blood circulation 
 
is contraindicated to patients with lung diseases, as well as in obstetrics. 
 
PENTAZOCINE 
 
 
is a synthetic preparation 
 
 
is administered orally, SC, IM, IV, or rectally; acts during 3-4 hrs 
 
 
is an agonist-antagonist of opioid receptors. It acts as an agonist on κ-
receptors and as a weak antagonist at μ- and δ-receptors. It also binds to 
σ- receptors that results in dysphoria 
 
is less potent than morphine (analgesia is mainly due to the activation of 
receptors in the spinal cord) 
 
produces less inhibition of respiration, less spasm of smooth muscles in 
the GI tract; less euphoria and drug dependence 
 
is used to relieve moderate pain; may be used in children and for 
analgesia in labor 
 
in high dose causes such side-effects as nausea, vomiting, vertigo, 
sweating, hyperemia of skin, suppression of respiration, dysphoria, 
abstinence in opi-ate abusers, tachycardia, an increase in BP (IV), an 
increase in intracranial pressure, a decrease in the activity of the gut 
 
is contraindicated in diseases of the liver and kidney, cranial trauma, 
prone to seizures, pregnancy, opiate abuse 

Chapter 12.  OPIOID (NARCOTIC) ANALGESICS 
147
 
 
is not used with morphine and other agonists of opioid receptors, because 
may block their analgesic effects. 
 
BUTORPHANOL 
 
 
is a strong analgesic for parenteral use. 
 
 
belongs to the group of antagonists-agonists of opiate receptors (agonist 
κ- and antagonist of μ-opiate receptors) 
 
by onset and duration of action it is close to morphine, but is effective in 
smaller doses than morphine 
 
ompared with morphine has a lesser ability to cause physical dependence, 
less often causes constipation. 
 
NALBUPHINE 
 
 
is semi-synthetic opioid of the phenanthrene series 
 
 
behaves as a moderate-efficacy partial agonist (or mixed agonist-
antagonist) of the μ-opioid receptor and as a high-efficacy partial agonist 
of the κ-opioid receptor 
 
 
has limited ability to depress respiratory function 
 
 
the most frequent side-ffect is sedation; other reactions are: feeling sweaty/ 
clammy, nausea/vomiting, dizziness/vertigo, dry mouth, and headache. 
 
NALORPHINE 
 
 
is a synthetic preparation with a structure related to morphine 
 
 
is administered IV, IM, SC 
 
 
is the agonist-antagonist of opioid receptors; is a weak narcotic analgesic 
and competitor of morphine in binding to receptors 
 
decreases the main and side-effects of morphine 
 
 
is used in acute poisoning with morphine and other narcotic analgesics 
 
 
is not used as a narcotic analgesic, because may cause psychic 
excitement, anxiety, hallucination 
 
in higher dose may cause nausea, vomiting, headache, miosis, 
drowsiness, psychic excitement 
 
is not used in morphine abused patients due to its ability to provoke with-
drawal syndrome. 
 
BUPRENORPHINE 
 
 
is a synthetic preparation 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
is administered orally and parenterally and has a long duration of action 
 
 
is a partial agonist of μ-receptors 
 
 
is suitable to control of chronic severe pains 
 
 
is used in combined preparations to treat opiate abuse 
 
 
may cause respiratory depression, a decrease in BP, nausea, dizziness 
 
 
intoxication with buprenorphine cannot be reversed with antagonists, 
because the drug dissociates very slowly from the opioid receptors and 
competitive occupacy of the receptors cannot be achieved as fast as the 
clinical situation demands. 
  
TRAMADOL 
 
 
is a synthetic preparation 
 
 
is administered orally, IV, IM., rectally; acts during 3-6 hrs 
 
 
has a mixed mechanism of action (opioid + non-opioid). It is a weak 
agonist of μ-receptors and is partially antagonized by naloxone. It inhibits 
the re-uptake of norepinephrine and serotonin that leads to the 
reinforcement of spinal inhibition of pain impulses 
 
 
is less potent than morphine; does not influence respiration and GI 
functions, rarely causes drug dependence 
 
is indicated for the control of intermediate and severe, acute and chronic 
pains 
 
causes such side-effects as headache, vertigo, dormancy, sweating, 
lowering of BP, tachycardia, dry mouth, allergy, seizures (in overdose). 
 
NALOXONE 
 
 
is a synthetic preparation 
 
 
is administered IV,IM; has a rapid start of action and half-life of 1-1,5 hrs 
 
 
is a non-selective antagonist of opioid receptors (it is competitive antago-
nist at μ-, κ- and δ-receptors, with 10-fold higher affinity for μ-receptors 
(fig.12.3) 
 
 
abolishs effects of opioid analgesics including effects of agonist-
antagonists; reverses the coma and respiratory depression in opioid 
overdose; does not produces pharmacological effects in normal 
individual, but provokes a withdrawal syndrome in morphine abusers 
 
 
is used in acute poisoning with narcotic analgesics and acute alcohol poi-
soning. 

Chapter 12.  OPIOID (NARCOTIC) ANALGESICS 
149
 
NALTREXONE 
 
 
is non-selective antagonist of opioid receptors similar to naloxone 
 
 
is metabolically more stable than naloxone and is taken orally; has a long 
duration of action (to 48 hrs) 
 
is used in opiate-dependence maintenance programs and in the treatment 
of chronic alcoholism. 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. The incorrect statement about morphine is only: 
 
 
It is an antagonist of opioid receptors 
 
 
It is the most effective by parenteral administration 
 
 
It causes euphoria and sedation 
 
 
It causes respiratory depression 
 
 
Its effects are antagonized by naloxone. 
 
№2. The side-effects of opioid analgesics include all, except: 
 
 
The inhibition of respiration 
 
 
Stimulation of anti-diuretic hormone release 
 
 
Drug dependence 
 
 
Tolerance 
 
 
The suppression of hemopoiesis. 
 
№3. Pentazocine is: 
 
 
An agonist-antagonist of opioid analgesics 
 
 
A less potent analgesic than morphine 
 
 
The most potent in its ability to cause drug dependence 
 
 
Agent caused dysphoria 
 
 
The antagonist of opioid receptors used in acute poisoning with morphine. 
 
 
4. Naloxone is used in acute poisoning with opioid analgetisc due to: 
 
A. Agonism to opioid receptors 
 
B. Competitive antagonism with opioid agonists 
C. A rapid onset of action 
D. A long duration of action 
 
E.  The ability to cause abstinence in morphine abusers. 

150 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
№5. A man was taken to the emergency department with numerous traumas of 
the chest and head. The surgeon proposed to inject morphine to relieve 
patient’s condition, but the anesthesiologist rejected the proposition of his 
colleague. Why is morphine contraindicated in this case? 
 
 
It increases intracranial pressure 
 
 
It stimulates the vagal center 
 
 
It decreases intraocular pressure 
 
 
It causes miosis 
 
 
It depresses the center of a cough reflex. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – A; № 2 – E; № 3 – A, B, D; № 4 – B, C; № 5 – A. 

Chapter 13.  NON-OPIOID ANALGESICS 
151
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 NON-OPIOID 
ANALGESICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROSTAGLANDINS 
 
Origin and synthesis 
 
Prostaglandins (Pg) are the derivatives of the arachidonic acid. Relative sub-
stances are thromboxane, prostacyclin, and leukotrienes. The arachidonic acid is a 
regular constituent of cell membrane phospolipids; it is released by phospolipase A2 
and forms the substrate of cyclooxygenases (COX) and lipooxygenases (fig. 13.1). 
 
COX is the enzyme responsible for the formation of prostaglandins. There are 
two isozymes: COX-1 and COX-2. COX-1 is a constitutive; COX-2 is induced in 
the process of inflammation (fig. 13.2). 
 
Biological effects 
 
 
Pg are the regulators of inflammation 
 
 
They increase pain sensation: pain receptors become more sensitive to 
inflammatory mediators, such as bradykinin and serotonin (fig. 13.3) 

152 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
Phospholipid 
Arachidonic 
Acid 
Phospholipase A2 
Prostaglandin 
Cyclooxygenase 
E
2 
Specific 
Syntheses 
Thromboxane 
Prostacyclin 
Prostaglandin 
Prostaglandin 
A2 
E2 
F2 
 
 
Fig. 13.1. Synthesis of prostaglandins (http://www.picsearch.com). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Physiologic 
Inflammatory 
Stimulus 
Stimulus 
• 
Intestine 
• 
Macrophages 
• 
Platelets 
COX-1 
COX-2 
• 
Leukocytes 
• 
Stomach 
Constitutive 
Inducible 
• 
Fibroblasts 
• 
Kidney 
• 
Endothelial 
Cells 
TXA2     PGI2     PGE2 
PGI2     PGE2 
Inflammation 
"Housekeeping" 
 
 
Fig. 13.2. Peculiarities of COX-1 and COX-2 (http://www.picsearch.com). 

Chapter 13.  NON-OPIOID ANALGESICS 
153
 
 
Pg rise the set point of hypothalamic thermoregulatory neurons and 
increase the body temperature (fig. 13.3) 
 
PGE2, PGI2 produce the dilation of arterioles, PGF2α – venoconstriction 
(fig.13.3) 
 
 
Pg promote the production of the gastric mucus and reduce the formation 
of the gastric acid 
 
They stimulate labor contractions and regulate menstruation (fig. 13.3) 
 
 
PGE2, PGI2 produce the dilation of bronchi, PGF2α causes the 
constriction of bronchi 
 
 
PG regulate the renal blood flow 
 
 
Thromboxane A2 and prostacyclin regulate platelet aggregation and 
vascular diameter. 
 
 
Prostaglandins 
 
 
[H+]  
Mucus 
production  
 
Fever 
Kidney 
function 
Vasodilation 
Labor 
Impulse 
frequency in 
sensory fiber  
Capillary permeability  
Nociceptor 
sensibility  
 
Pain stimulus 
 
Fig. 13.3. Biological effects of prostaglandins (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
NON-OPIOID ANALGESICS 
 
Non-opioid analgesics are drugs for a decrease of intermediate and weak 
pain, especially resulting from inflammation 

154 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
They always have: 
 
 
an analgesic action 
 
 
an anti-inflammatory action 
 
 
an antipyretic action 
 
Drugs with the prevalence of anti-inflammatory activity are named non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory preparations (NSAIDs) (fig. 13.4). Structurally they can be 
grouped into salicylates, carbonic acids, or enolic acids. Their main effects are similar 
and the choice between NSAIDs is dictated by their pharmacokinetics and side-effects. 
 
 
NSAIDs 
 
e.g. aspirin 
 
 
 
Anti-inflammatory 
 
effect (strong) 
 
 
 
Analgesic effect 
 
(strong) 
 
 
 
Antipyretic effect 
 
(strong) 
 
Fig. 13.4. Expression of effects of NSAIDs. 
 
Drugs with the prevalence of analgesic and anti-pyretic activity are named 
analgesics-antipyretics (fig. 13.5). 
 
 
 
Analgesics-antipyretics 
 
e.g. paracetamol 
 
 
 
Anti-inflammatory 
 
effect (weak) 
 
 
 
Analgesic effect 
 
(strong) 
 
 
 
Antipyretic effect 
 
(strong) 
 
Fig. 13.5. Expression of effects of analgesics-antipyretics. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
According to the chemical structure 
 
 
Salicylates 
 
–  Acetylsalicylic acid (Aspirin) 
 
 
Pyrazoles 

Chapter 13.  NON-OPIOID ANALGESICS 
155
 
–  Metamizole (Analgin) 
 
–  Phenylbutazone (Butadione) 
 
 
Fenamates 
 
–  Mefenamic acid 
 
 
Indolacetic acid derivatives 
 
–  Indomethacin 
 
 
Phenylacetic acid derivatives 
 
–  Diclofenac-sodium 
 
 
Propionic acid derivatives 
 
–  Ibuprofen 
 
 
Para-aminophenol derivatives 
 
–  Paracetamol (Acetominophen) 
 
 
Oxicams 
 
–  Piroxicam 
 
–  Meloxicam (Movalis) 
 
 
Coxibs 
 
–  Celecoxib 
 
According to the mode of 
action A. Non-selective inhibitors of COX-1 and COX-2 
 
 
Mainly with a peripheral action 
 
–  Acetylsalicylic acid 
 
–  Phenylbutazone 
 
–  Metamizole 
 
–  Mefenamic acid 
 
–  Indometacin 
 
–  Diclofenac-sodium 
 
–  Ibuprofen 
 
–  Piroxicam 
 
 
Mainly with a central action 
 
–  Paracetamol 
 
–  Meloxicam 
 
–  Celecoxib. 
 
Mechanism of anti-inflammatory action 
 
Inhibition of COX by non-opioid analgesics leads to a decrease in the synthesis of 
prostaglandins (PgE2) (fig, 13.6). That results in a decrease of the permeability 

156 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
of blood vessels in the site of inflammation, inhibition of hyaluronidase activity, 
stabilization of lysosomal membranes, and a decrease in lysosomal enzymes release. 
The inhibition of energy processes in the area of inflammation and the inhibition of 
leukocytes activity are also observed. All the listed events lead to a decrease in the 
exudation stage of inflammation. Some most active preparations (e.g. indometacin) 
inhibit fibroblasts’ activity and decrease the proliferation stage of inflammation. 
 
 
INHIBITION OF COX AND  PG SYNTHESIS 
 
 permeability of blood vessels 
 
 hyaluronidase activity 
 
 lysosomal enzymes release 
 
 energy processes 
 
 leukocytes activity 
 
Fig. 13.6. Mechanism of anti-inflammatory action of non-opioid analgesigs 
 
Mechanism of anti-pyretic action 
 
The set point of the body temperature is programmed in the hypothalamic 
thermoregulatory center. A stable body temperature is due to the balance between 
heat production and heat output. Pyrogens elevate the set point of the 
hypothalamic temperature controller. The body responds by restricting a heat loss 
and elevating heat production that results in the fever. 
 
Non-opioid analgesics inhibit COX and decrease the synthesis of PgE2 in the 
hypothalamus. In such a way they decrease the sensitivity of the hypothalamus to 
pyrogens, increase heat output and lower high body temperature without the action 
on the normal temperature (fig. 13.7). 
 
Mechanism of analgesic action 
 
Inhibition of COX by non-opioid analgesics leads to a decrease in the synthe-
sis of prostaglandins. That results in a decrease of the sensitivity of nociceptors to 
inflammatory mediators and an increase of the pain threshold. Such events cause a 
decrease in the transmission of pain impulses in CNS and relief of pain. 
 
Mechanism of anti-platelet action 

Chapter 13.  NON-OPIOID ANALGESICS 
157
Pyrogen 
Antipyretics 
 
 
3 
5 
° 3
° 
6
 
Set point 
 
elevation 
 
 
 
3
 7 
° 
 
 
° 
39 
° 
8
3 
 
 
 
 
Temperature 
 
rise 
 
 
 
Fever 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 5 
° 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
° 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
 7 
° 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
°
39
° 
8 
3 
 
Fig. 13.7. Mechanism of antipyretic action of non-opioid analgesics 
 
(by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Some non-narcotic analgesics (e.g. the acetylsalicylic acid) may cause the 
inhibition of COX-1 in platelets and a decrease in thromboxane A2 synthesis. That 
results in the inhibition of platelet aggregation and adhesion, normalization of 
blood viscosity and prevention of thrombus formation. 
 
In higher doses non-narcotic analgesics also inhibit prostacyclin 
synthesis. Some other mechanisms of action 
 
In high concentrations NSAIDs influence nitric oxide-dependent processes, 
in-hibit 5-lipoxigenase, and reduce the production of leukotrienes. They activate 
PPAR connected with colorectal carcinogenesis, act on apoptosis signalling. 
 
 
ACETYLSALICYLIC ACID (ASPIRIN) 
 
Acetylsalicylic acid is salicylate, a weak organic acid (fig. 13.8). 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally, sometimes IM, IV (Acelysin) 

158 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 13.8. Chemical structure of acetylsalicylic acid. 
 
 
is absorbed in the stomach and the small intestine by passive diffusion 
 
(absorption is increased by acidic pH in the stomach) 
 
 
binds to albumins in blood plasma 
 
 
crosses the blood-brain barrier and placenta 
 
 
displays maximal concentration in blood in 2 hrs after the administration 
 
 
concentrates in the adrenal glands, liver, heart, lungs 
 
 
at normal low doses, is hydrolyzed to salicylate and the acetic acid by es-
terases present in tissues and blood (fig. 13.10) 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver where salicylate is converted to water-soluble 
conjugates 
 
 
is excreted with urine (alkalic pH increases the excretion of aspirin and 
its metabolites) 
 
 
acts during 4-6 hrs; has a duration of anti-platelet action of 7 days 
 
 
at normal low dose of 600mg/day, has a half-life of 3,5 hrs; at anti-
inflamma-tory doses (>4g/day), has a half-life of 15 hrs or more due to 
the saturation of hepatic metabolic pathway. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Aspirin is a non-selective inhibitor of COX-1 and COX-2 in peripheral 
tissues and in CNS. 
 
 
It irreversibly acetylates and thus inactivates COX (fig.13.9). All other 
non-opioid analgesics are reversible COX inhibitors. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
an anti-inflammatory action (a decrease in exudation) 
 
 
an anti-pyrexiae action (a decrease in high body temperature) 
 
 
an analgesic action (a decrease in intermediate and weak pain) 

Chapter 13.  NON-OPIOID ANALGESICS 
159
Drug’s 
action 
Acetylsalicylic 
acid 
H2O 
COX 
Acetate 
(active) 
Acetylated COX 
(inactive) 
Normal deacetylation 
by esterase 
Salicylic 
acid 
 
 
 
Fig. 13.9. Acetylation of COX by acetylsalicylic acid. 
 
 
an anti-platelet action (an irreversible decrease in platelet aggregation) 
 
 
an anti-gout action (an increase in output of urates) 
 
 
the stimulation of respiration (at therapeutic doses, aspirin increases 
alveolar ventilation; at high doses, it works directly on the respiratory 
center resulting in hyperventilation and respiratory alkalosis) 
 
the dilation of blood vessels ( in higher doses) 
 
 
the stimulation of synthesis of glucocorticoids (in higher doses) 
 
 
an increase in the secretion and excretion of bile 
 
 
changes in pH of blood (in higher doses) 
 
 
hypoglycemia (in higher doses). 
 
Indications 
 
 
Rheumatism 
 
 
Fever 
 
 
Arthritis 
 
 
Headache, toothache, myalgia, neuralgia 
 
 
Gout 
 
 
Dysmenorrhea 
 
 
Prophylaxis of re-thrombosis, myocardial infarction, or insult 
 
 
Thombophlebitis 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Patent ductus artriosus 
 
 
Prevention of colorectal cancer. 
  
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Allergy (resulting from acetylation of albumins by 
1. Allergy to salicylates 
aspirin) 
2. Ulcerative disease of the 
2. Skin rash 
stomach and duodenum 
3. Spasm of bronchi, “aspirin asthma” (resulting from 
3. Ulcerative colitis 
the inhibition of Pg synthesis and overproduction of 
4. Bleeding 
leukotrienes) (fig. 13.10) 
5. Bronchial asthma 
4. Gastric ulceration (resulting from a decrease in prosta- 
6. Inhibition of hemopoiesis 
cyclin synthesis in the gastric wall, as well as from the 
7. Hepatic and renal impair- 
irritation of the gastric mucosa) (fig. 13.10) 
ment 
5. Vertigo 
8. Pregnancy. 
 
Thrombocytopenia 
 
 
Hypocoagulation, bleeding 
 
 
A decrease in renal blood flow, the retention of 
so-dium and water 
 
Disturbances in normal development of pregnancy, 
prolonged labor, bleeding tendency in the mother and 
infant, a premature closure of ductus arteriosus 
 
 
Reye’s syndrome in children (hepatitis and 
cerebral edema). 
 
Concomitant administration of aspirin with many classes of drugs may 
produce undesirable side-effects: 
 
 
Aspirin + Antacids =  aspirin’s absorption 
 
 
Aspirin + Sulfinpyrazone, probenecid =  urate excretion 
 
 
Aspirin + Heparin, oral anticoagulants = hemorrhage 
 
 
Aspirin + Barbiturates, thyroxine =  effects and toxicity. 
 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
INDOMETHACIN 
 
 
is an indolacetic acid derivative 
 
 
is one of the most active non-narcotic analgesics, belongs to NSAIDs 
 
 
anti-inflammation is the strongest effect: it inhibits exudation, as well as 
proliferation 
 
exceeds aspirin in anti-inflammation, analgesia, and anti-pyrexia 

Chapter 13.  NON-OPIOID ANALGESICS 
161
 
 
 
 
NSAID-induced 
 
nephrotoxicity 
 
 
 
Renal blood 
 
flow 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NSAID-induced 
 
gastropathy 
 
 
Arachidonic acid 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prostaglandins 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mucus production  
 
Acid secretion  
 
Mucosal blood flow  
 
 
Leukotrienes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Airway resistance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NSAlD-induced 
asthma 
 
 
Fig. 13.10. Group-specific side-effects of aspirin and other NSAIDs 
 
(by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
 
is administered orally, rectally, topically; displays maximal concentration in 
 
2 hrs after the oral administration; has a half-life of 2-3 hrs; is 
metabolized in the liver; is excreted with urine (2/3) and with bile (1/3) 
 
is 
indicated 
in 
rheumatism, 
collagenosis, 
arthritis, 
gout, 
glomerulonephritis, trauma of joints and soft tissues, thrombophlebitis, 
tendovaginitis, myositis, myalgia, neuralgia (typically in the form of 
ointment); is also beneficial in the control of the pain associated with 
uveitis and postoperative ophthalmic procedures, in fever caused by 
Hodgkin’s disease, in treating patients with ductus arteriosus 
 
 
has such side-effects as headache, vertigo, dormancy, depression, pain in the 
epigastric area, ulcer of the stomach, nausea, a decrease in appetite, gastro-
intestinal bleeding, skin rash, leukopenia, aplastic anemia, disturbances in the 
renal function, acute pancreatitis, hepatitis and jaundice 
 
 
is contraindicated in ulcerative disease, bronchial asthma, infections, preg-
nancy, lactation, epilepsy, Parkinson’s disease, psychic disorders, anemia. 
 
DICLOFENAC-SODIUM 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
is a phenylacetyc acid dervative 
 
 
anti-inflammation is the strongest effect 
 
 
belongs to NSAIDs, exceeds aspirin and indomethacin 
 
is administerefd orally, IM, topically (gel, ointment) 
 
displays maximal concentration in plasma in 1-2 hrs after the oral ad-
ministration; binds to proteins in blood plasma (96% of preparation); has 
concentration in synovial liquid which exceeds the same in blood in 5 
times and half-life in synovial liquid (8 hrs) which is more durative than 
the same in blood (3 hrs); is excreted with urine and bile 
 
has indications similar to indications of indometacin; is approved for a 
long-term use in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, and 
ankylosing spondilitis 
 
is less toxic than indomethacin, but may cause a loss of appetite, pain in 
epigastric area, meteorism, constipation, diarrhea, rarely ulceration in the 
stomach, 
gastro-intestinal 
bleeding, 
headache, 
drowsiness, 
thrombocytope-nia, nasal bleeding, microhematuria, allergy, skin rash. 
  
IBUPROFEN 
 
 
is a propionic acid derivative 
 
is an active anti-inflammatory and analgesic agent, belongs to NSAIDs 
 
 
has high effectiveness for the treatment of joint diseases 
 
is administered orally and applied topically (gel, ointment) 
 
is used for arthritis, osteoarthrosis, a joint form of rheumatism, bursitis, 
tendovaginitis, trauma of joints and soft tissues 
 
is untoxic; has minimal influence on the gastric mucosa 
 
may be used in pregnant women. 
 
PIROXICAM 
 
 
is a preparation from oxicams 
 
has a strong durative anti-inflammatory action, belongs to NSAIDs 
 
 
is taken orally once a day; has a half-life of 40-45 hrs, thus is 
administered once a day; is metabolized in the liver and excreted with 
urine in the form of glucuronides 
 
is used to treat rheumatism, rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondilitis, 
osteoarthritids, acute gout 
 
may cause such side-effects as gastric ulceration, skin rash, the inhibition 
of blood formation, toxic action on CNS. 

Chapter 13.  NON-OPIOID ANALGESICS 
163
 
MEFENAMIC ACID 
 
 
is fenamate 
 
has structural similarity to salicylates; belongs to NSAIDs 
 
 
anti-inflammation and analgesia exceed those of aspirin; apyrexia is 
equal to that of aspirin, is the inductor of interferon 
 
is used for the treatment of arthritis, arthralgia, myalgia, neuralgia, 
headache, toothache, fever 
 
has less side-effects in comparison with salicylates; may cause nausea, pain 
in the abdomen, diarrhea associated with the inflammation of the bowel. 
 
METAMIZOLE (ANALGIN) 
 
 
A 
              B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acute 
massive 
over- 
dose 
> 10 g 
Risk of 
anaphylactoid 
Agranulo- 
shock 
Hepato- 
cytosis 
toxicity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chronic 
 
abuse 
 
 
 
 
 
? 
 
 
 
Nephro- 
 
toxicity 
 
Fig. 13.11. Chemical structure, routs of administration, and side-effects 
 
of analgesics-antipyretics: A – metamizole; B – paracetamol (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
is a pyrazole derivative (fig. 13.11) 
 
 
belongs to analgesics-antipyretics; has strong analgesic and anti-pyretic 
activity, but weak anti-inflammatory activity 
 
is administered orally, IM, IV, rectally (fig. 13.11) 
 
 
begins to act in 20 min after the IM injection; acts during 3-4 hrs 
 
 
is potentiated by antihistamines 
 
 
is indicated in intermediate and weak somatic pains (headache, toothache, 
myalgia, neuralgia, arthralgia), visceral pans, control of intermediate 
post-operative pain, fever, dysmenorrhea 
 
 
may cause allergy, the inhibition of hemopoiesis (agranulocytosis) (fig. 
13.11). 
  
PARACETAMOL (ACETAMINOPHEN) 
 
 
is a para-aminophenol derivative (fig. 13.11) 
 
 
has intermediate analgesic and anti-pyretic activity, a weak anti-inflam-
matory action, does not affect platelet aggregation (belongs to 
analgesics-antipyretics) 
 
 
is mainly centrally acting preparation 
 
 
is administered orally, rectally (fig. 13.11) 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver to form inactive glucuronated and sulfated me-
tabolites; is partially transformed into N-acetyl-benzoquinoneimine (a 
highly reactive and dangerous metabolite), which is inactivated by SH-
groups of glutathione 
 
 
is used in headache, pains in muscles and joints, the fever associated with 
infection and inflammatory diseases; is an analgesic-antipyretic of choice 
for children with viral infections or chicken pox 
 
 
is untoxic; rarely causes disturbances in the renal function (renal tubular 
necrosis and hypoglycemic coma as complications of prolonged large-
dose therapy); in acute overdose, may provoke hepatic necrosis due to the 
interaction of N-acetyl-benzoquinoneimine with hepatic proteins (should 
be treated by acetylcysteine, a substitute of glutathione) 
 
 
may be used in children, as well as in adult patients 
 
 
may be handed over to the patient without prescription; is one of the most 
popular preparations in the world. 
 
MELOXICAM (MOVALIS) 
 
 
is a drug from oxicams 

Chapter 13.  NON-OPIOID ANALGESICS 
165
 
 
is a selective inhibitor of COX-2; NSAID; does not influence platelet ag-
gregation and gastric mucosa 
 
has a mainly peripheral action 
 
 
is administered orally, IM 
 
 
is absorbed in the GI tract; develops maximal concentration in 1 hr after the 
 
IM injection; displays stable concentration in plasma in 3-5 days after the 
start of treatment; has concentration in synovial fluid which is more than that 
in plasma; has half-elimination of 20 hrs, is excreted with urine and bile 
 
 
is used to treat arthritis, arthrosis, spondylitis, rheumatoid arthritis 
 
 
may cause such side-effects as dyspepsia, gastric ulceration, gastro-
intestinal bleeding, hepatic and hematological disturbances, skin rash, 
headache (in 0,1-1% of patients) 
 
 
is contraindicated to patients with hypersensitivity to NSAIDs; should be 
used under the physician’s supervision in the cases of gastro-intestinal 
diseases, heart failure, cirrhosis of the liver, chronic renal diseases. 
 
CELECOXIB 
 
 
belongs to the group of coxibs 
 
 
is selective inhibitor of COX-2; NSAID; acts in the site of inflammation 
 
 
does not influence platelet aggregation, as well as the gastric mucosa 
 
 
is taken orally 
 
 
is absorbed in the GI tract; develops maximal concentration in plasma in 
 
2-3 hrs after the administration; is bound to plasma proteins, has half-life 
of 8-12 hrs; displays stable concentration in 5 days after the start of the 
treatment; penetrates the blood-brain barrier and placenta 
 
 
is used in rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthrosis 
 
 
may cause pain in the epigastrium, dyspepsia; very rarely: gastritis, 
stoma-titis, ulcer of the stomach, dysphagia, gastro-intestinal bleeding, 
headache, vertigo, insomnia, depression, an increase in intracranial 
pressure, hyper-tension, tachycardia, etc. 
 
 
is contraindicated to patients with acute gastric ulcer, hypersensitivity to 
 
NSAIDs. 
 
AMIZON 
 
 
is a modern preparation 
 
 
is a derivative of the isonicotinic acid 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
has properties of non-narcotic analgesic, direct antiviral and immune 
stimulating activity 
 
is taken orally 2-4 times daily; develops maximal concentration in 2-2,5 
hrs after administration: has half-elimination from tissues of 2-3 hrs and 
half-elimination from blood of 13-14 hrs; is metabolized in the liver and 
excreted with urine 
 
 
has anti-inflammatory, anti-pyretic, and analgesic actions resulting from 
inhibition of Pg synthesis; has antiviral activity resulting from direct 
influ-ence on viruses, as well as from interferon induction; is stimulant 
both of cell and humoral immunity 
 
 
is indicated in influenza, acute viral respiratory infections, herpes, the 
treatment and non-specific prophylaxis of viral and bacterial infections, 
osteochondrosis, arthritis, neuralgia, acute and chronic inflammation in 
patients with surgical and gynecological pathology 
 
 
produces such side-effects as unpleasant taste, edema of nasal mucosa. 
 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. The main mechanism of non-opiod analgesics action is: 
 
 
The inhibition of prostaglandins synthesis 
 
 
The inhibition of cyclooxygenase 
 
 
The inhibition of monoaminooxidase 
 
 
An increase in noradrenaline release 
 
 
The inhibition of dopamine reuptake. 
 
№2. All the listed drugs are non-selective inhibitors of COX, except: 
 
 
Indomethacin 
 
 
Diclofenac sodium 
 
 
Ibuprofen 
 
 
Acetaminophen 
 
 
Celecoxib. 
 
№3. Non-opioid analgesics exert the following effects: 
 
 
An antipyretic action 
 
 
Immunity suppression 
 
 
An anti-inflammatory action 
 
 
An analgesic action 
 
 
A hypnotic action. 

Chapter 13.  NON-OPIOID ANALGESICS 
167
 
 
 
4. The following statements concerning paracetamol are true: 
 
A. It is a weaker anti-inflammatory agent than aspirin B. 
It reduces the fever of viral infections in children C. It is 
an aspirin substitute in patients with peptic ulcer D. It 
disturbs hemopoiesis 
 
E.  It may cause spasm of bronchi. 
 
№5. A patient with toothache relieved his pain with the help of metamizole 
(Analginum). Point out another useful effect of this drug that contributes 
to the improvement of the patient’s condition: 
 
 
A sedative effect 
 
 
An anti-inflammatory effect 
 
 
An anti-platelet effect 
 
 
An antioxidative effect 
 
 
An antimicrobial effect. 
 
Answers: 
 
№ 1 – B; № 2 – E; № 3 – A, C, D, № 4 – A, B; № 5 – B. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 ANALEPTICS. 
PSYCHOMOTOR 
STIMULANTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DRUGS STIMULATING CNS 
 
Drugs stimulating CNS are preparations which increase the activity of some 
structures of the brain. They are divided into groups according to their site of 
action and main effect (fig. 14.1). 
 
 
DRUGS STIMULATING CNS 
 
Analeptics (stimulants of medulla of brain) 
 
Psychomotor stimulants (stimulants of brain cortex) 
 
Antidepressants (drugs decreasing depression) 
 
Nootrops (cognition enhancers) 
 
Adaptogens (working capacity enhancers) 
 
Actoprotectors (enhances of ability to physical work) 
 
Anorexigens (centrally acting appetite inhibitors) 
 
Fig. 14.1. Main groups of CNS stimulants. 

Chapter 14.  ANALEPTICS. PSYCHOMOTOR STIMULANTS 
169
 
ANALEPTICS 
 
Analeptics are the drugs which stimulate mainly the respiratory and 
vasomotor centers in medullar part of CNS. 
 
They always have such effects as: 
 
 
an increase in respiration resulting from the stimulation of the respiratory 
center 
 
an increase in BP resulting from the stimulation of vasomotor center 
 
 
a decrease in the action of drugs inhibiting CNS (an awakening effect) 
 
 
seizures (in higher doses) 
 
СLASSIFICATION 
According to the type of action 
 
 
Direct-acting 
 
–  Bemegride 
 
–  Etimizol 
 
–  Strychnine nitrate 
 
–  Caffeine (Caffeine-sodium benzoate) 
 
 
Indirect-acting (M-cholinomimetics) 
 
–  Cytizin (Cytitonum) 
 
–  Lobeline 
 
 
Mixed-acting 
 
–  Camphor 
 
–  Sulfocamphocaine 
 
–  Nikethamide (Cordiaminum) 
 
–  Carbogenum. 
 
According to the mechanism of action 
 
 
Membrane-tropic 
 
–  Camphor 
 
–  Sulfocamphocaine 
 
 
Barbituratergic 
 
–  Bemegride 
 
 
Benzdiazepinergic 
 
–  Nikethamide 
 
 
Purinergic 
 
–  Caffeine 
 
–  Etimizol 
 
 
Glycinergic 
 
–  Strychnine. 

170 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
CAMPHOR 
 
Camphor is a bicyclic ketone (fig. 14.2), may be natural or synthetic. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 14.2. Chemical structure of camphor. 
 
Natural and synthetic camphor are isomeric forms and both have pharmacologi-
cal activity. Natural camphor is contained in a camphor tree (fig.14.3). 
 
Camphor is indissolved in water, but is well dissolved in oil and alcohol, has 
a specific aroma. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 14.3. Camphor tree containing natural camphor. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered SC, orally, or topically 
 
 
is absorbed in the small intestine 
 
 
penetrates the blood-brain barrier 
 
 
is metabolized in microsomes of the liver 
 
 
is excreted with urine, bronchial liquid, nursing mother’s milk. 

Chapter 14.  ANALEPTICS. PSYCHOMOTOR STIMULANTS 
171
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Camphor is a mixed-acting analeptic. It has a direct and indirect action. 
 
 
Direct action includes disturbances in the permeability of the neuronal 
membrane to Na+. They results in an increase of Na+ concentration in the 
cells that leads to the maintenance of the excitement of neurons in the 
me-dulla of brain (fig. 14.4). 
 
 
The indirect component of camphor’s mechanism of action is realized by 
the stimulation of chemoreceptors of zona carotis and a reflexive 
excitation of centers in the prolonged medulla (fig. 14.4). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
a local action (antiseptic, irritating, trophic, whitening) 
 
 
 
Change in Na+ transport through 
 
membrane 
 
 
An increase in Na+ 
 
concentration in cells 
 
 
An increase in excitation 
 
in centers of prolonged medulla 
 
 
A 
 
 
 
 
Stimulation of chemoreceptors of 
 
carotid sinus 
 
 
Reflexive excitation of centers in 
 
prolonged medulla 
 
 
B 
 
Fig. 14.4. Mechanism of camphor’s action: A – direct action; B – indirect action. 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
the stimulation of the respiratory center in its moderate suppression 
resulting in the acceleration and deepening of breath 
 
the stimulation of the vasomotor center in its suppression resulting in an 
increase of BP 
 
an awakening action and a decrease in the effects of CNS inhibitors 
 
 
a positive inotropic action (an increase in strength of heart contractions under 
the conditions of heart failure resulting from the enhance of the myocardium 
sensitivity to catecholamines and the intensification of metabolic processes) 
 
 
the improvement of microcirculation 
 
 
the inhibition of platelet aggregation 
 
 
an expectorant action resulting from excretion by bronchial glands 
 
 
the stimulation of lactation. 
 
 
Indications 
 
 
A moderate suppression of respiration caused by infections and intoxications 
 
 
Collapse, shock 
 
 
Acute and chronic heart failure 
 
 
Pneumonia 
 
 
Skin diseases, external otitis, myalgia, myositis, arthralgia, arthritis, for 
the prophylaxis of trophic disturbances of the skin in long lying patients 
(topically). 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Allergy 
1. Hypersensitivity to camphor 
2. Seizures 
2. Epilepsy, prone to seizures 
3. Infiltrate in the site of injection 
3. Should not be administered 
4. Fat embolism if the drug is administered IV or IM. 
IV or IM. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Sulfacamphocaine is a complex compound of camphor and procaine; is 
water-soluble; is administered SC, IM, IV; is not applied topically; is used for the 
suppres-sion of respiration, collapse, shock, overdose of drugs inhibiting CNS, 
heart failure; is contraindicated to patients with allergy to procaine. 
 
Nikethamide (Cordiaminum) is a commercial name of 25% solution of diethyla-
mide of the nicotinic acid; is administered IV, IM, SC, orally; has a short action; is a 
mixed-acting analeptic (its direct action results from the inhibition of benzodiazepine 
receptors of Cl- channels); has typical analeptic effects; improves metabolism in the 
heart and liver; is indicated in the suppression of respiration, collapse, shock, overdose 

Chapter 14.  ANALEPTICS. PSYCHOMOTOR STIMULANTS 
173
 
of CNS inhibitors, chronic heart failure (orally); may cause seizures, hyperemia of 
the skin, pain in the site of injection; is contraindicated to patients with epilepsy, 
psychic excitement, hypersensitivity to the nicotinic acid. 
 
Bemegride is a synthetic preparation, a derivative of piperidine; is 
administered IV; is not bound to plasma proteins and begins to act quickly; is 
widely distributed in the body; is metabolized in the liver and excreted with urine; 
is a strong direct-acting analeptic inhibiting barbiturate receptors of Cl- ion 
channels; an awakening action is the strongest effect in comparison with other 
effects of Bemegridum (by this action Bemegridum is more potent than other 
analeptics); is indicated in acute poisonings with barbiturates, alcohol, narcotic 
analgesics; overdose of general an-esthetics; suppression of respiration; may cause 
seizures, tremor, hyperventilation, arrhythmia; is contraindicated in epilepsy, 
psychomotor excitement, intoxication with seizure poisonings. 
 
Etimizol is a synthetic preparation, an imidazole derivative; is administered IV, 
IM, and orally; has short action; is a direct-acting analeptic inhibitinig adenosine 
receptors; decreases phosphodiesterase activity, thus increases cAMP in cells; has 
pharmacological effects, which by their strength form the line: the stimulation of the 
respiratory center; the stimulation of vasomotor center and awakening action; produces 
the stimulation of ACTH secretion resulting in anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic 
effects, displays cognitive enhance, the improvement of the tone of myocardium and 
skeletal muscles, dilates bronchi; increases surfactant synthesis in the lungs; is used in 
the suppression of respiration, asphyxia of newborns, the prophylaxis of lungs 
athelectasis during inhalation general anesthesia, bronchial asthma, pneumonia, 
rheumatoid arthritis; may cause dyspepsia, vertigo, restlessness, insomnia; is 
contraindicated in epilepsy, psychic disorders, excitement. 
Strychnine is an alkaloid of vomiting nut (fig. 14.5); is administered SC and 
orally; is direct-acting drug inhibiting glycine receptors; acts mainly on the spinal 
cord, stimulates reflexive activity of the spinal cord; stimulates the cortex parts of 
analyzers, especially a vision analyzer; is used in neurological diseases 
accompanied by hypotonia, paralysis, paresis, asthenia, disturbances of vision 
resulting from en-cephalytis, atonia of the GI tract and urinary bladder, impotence; 
is used very rarely due to high toxicity: is a seizure poison (Seizures caused by 
strychnine are treated by myorelaxants). 
 
Carbogenum is a mixture of 3-7% CO2 and 93-97% O2; is administered by 
inhalation; has a mixed action; is a physiological stimulant of the respiratory center; is 
used for the treatment of asphyxia, respiratory arrest, prophylaxis of athelectasis and 
pneumonia after inhalation general anesthesia, suppression of respiration; may cause 
suppression of breathing if concentrations of CO2 will be high. 

174 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 14.5. Vomiting nut containing strychnine. 
 
PSYCHOMOTOR STIMULANTS 
 
Psychomotor stimulants are the drugs stimulating mainly cortical part of CNS. 
 
They always increase mental and physical performance. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 
Purinergic 
 
 
Methylxantines 
 
–  Сaffeine (Cofeinum natrii-benzoas) 
 
–  Theophylline 
 
 
Phenilalkilamines 
 
–  Amphetamine (Phenaminum) 
 
 
Piperidine derivatives 
 
–  Meridile 
 
 
Sydnonimine derivatives 
 
–  Mesocarb (Sydnocarb). 
 
CAFFEINE 
 
Caffeine is an alkaloid. It is methylxantine (fig. 14.6). 
 
Caffeine is contained in coffee, tea, cola drinks, chocolate candy, and cocoa 
(fig. 14.7). It is water-soluble, but salts of caffeine (Coffeine sodium benzoate) are 
better soluble than caffeine. 

Chapter 14.  ANALEPTICS. PSYCHOMOTOR STIMULANTS 
175
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 14.6. Chemical structure of caffeine. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, SC, IM, IV 
 
 
is well absorbed in the GI tract 
 
 
penetrates CNS and placenta 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver 
 
 
is excreted with urine and mother’s milk 
 
 
acts during 4 hrs; T½ = 3,9 – 5,3 hrs, is completelly eliminated for 24 hrs. 
 
 
A 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 14.7. Plants containing caffeine: A – Coffe arabica; B – Thea chinensis. 

176 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Caffeine blocks all the subtypes of adenosine receptors and decreases 
their inhibiting influence in the brain. In such a way it increases 
excitement in the brain cortex and some other areas of CNS. 
 
 
Caffeine stimulates the translocation of extracellular calcium into cells. 
 
 
It inhibits phosphodiesterase and increases cAMP concentration in cells. 
 
 
The drug also increases the activity of phosphorilase resulting in an 
increase of glycogen metabolism and forming of the energy. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
a psychostimulant action (an increase in the excitement in the cortex of the 
brain; a decrease in the time of answer to different irritants; an increase in 
mental and motor activity; a decrease in fatigue and somnolence) 
 
 
an analeptic action (direct stimulation of the respiratory and vasomotor 
centers in the brain medulla) 
 
the stimulation of reflexive activity of the spinal cord 
 
 
changes of heart rate, which depend on the ratio between a direct action 
on the heart and an indirect one resulting from the stimulation of the 
center of n.vagus (as a rule, an increase in heart rate) 
 
 
action on blood vessels, which is the sum of the central action 
(vasoconstric-tion) and the peripheral action (vasodilation): blood vessels 
in the heart, lungs, kidney, skeletal muscles are dilated; blood vessels in 
the brain cov-ers are dilated from the first, then – constricted (that results 
in a decrease of headache) 
 
 
the elevation of BP (in some individuals – lowering of BP or without 
changes) 
 
the stimulation of gastric secretion 
 
 
a diuretic action. 
 
Indications 
 
 
A decreased mental and physical ability to work 
 
 
Asthenia 
 
 
Fatigue 
 
 
Hypotension 
 
 
Collapse 
 
 
The suppression of respiration 
 
 
Diagnostic of the gastric secretory function 
 
 
Headache (as the an ingredient of combined preparations for headache). 

Chapter 14.  ANALEPTICS. PSYCHOMOTOR STIMULANTS 
177
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Agitation, anxiety 
1. Psychomotor excitement 
2. Insomnia 
2. Hypertension 
3. Tachycardia, arrhythmia 
3. Arrhythmia 
4. Hypertension 
4. Atherosclerosis 
5. Pain in stomach 
5. Hyperthyroidism 
6. Drug dependence 
6. Gastritis, ulcer of stomach. 
 
Withdrawal syndrome (lethargy, irritability, 
headache in users who have consumed more 
than 600mg per day). 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER METHYLATED XANTINES 
 
Theophylline is taken orally; has a half-life about 8,5 hrs; has a cellular 
mecha-nism like caffeine; causes more CNS stimulation than caffeine; increases 
cardiac work and diuresis, is an active bronchodilator; is used to treat bronchial 
asthma, apnea and bradycardia in premature infants; is not used widely due to 
toxicity and questionable efficacy. 
 
AMPHETAMINE 
 
 
is adrenergic psychomotor stimulant, phenylalkilamine 
 
 
is taken orally, is completely absorbed from the GI tract, metabolized in 
the liver, and excreted with urine, penetrates CNS, acts during 4-6 hrs 
 
increases the release of catecholamines into the synaptic gap, is a weak 
MAO inhibitor; produces the alteration of behavior which is due mainly 
to a release of dopamine; causes peripheral effects mediated primarily 
through the release of norepinephrine (fig. 14.8) 
 
 
causes strong psychostimulation, euphoria, anorexia, a peripheral adreno-
mimetic action 
 
is indicated for an increase of mental and physical capacity to work, 
narco-lepsy, attention deficit syndrome 
 
is used very rarely due to its side-effects 
 
 
may cause insomnia, irritability, weakness, tremor, confusion, delirium, 
panic state, anorexia, hypertension, tachycardia, arrhythmia, tolerance, 
addition 
 
 
causes psychic and physical dependence, “amphetamine psychosis” 
 
 
the treatment of overdose includes the acidification of urine, administration 
of chlorpromazine, labetalol for cardio-vascular normalization. 

178 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
A 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amphetamine 
 
Norepinephrine 
Norepinephrine 
Serotonin 
Dopamine 
Serotonin 
Dopamine 
RESPONSE 
INCREASED 
RESPONSE 
  
Fig. 14.8. Mechanism of amphetamine’s action (by R.Finkel et al., 2008). 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER ADRENERGIC 
 
PSYCHOMOTOR STIMULANTS 
 
Sydnocarb is an adrenergic psychomotor stimulant, a sydnoimine derivative; is 
taken orally; has a slow onset of psychomotor stimulation, does not produce euphoria, 
motor agitation, an increase in BP or other peripheral adrenomimetic effects; is used 
for the treatment of asthenia with dormancy and apathy, attention deficit in children, 
for a decrease in asthenia and myorelaxation caused by neuroleptics and anxiolytics; 
has such side effects as anxiety, anorexia, hypertension; is contraindicated to patients 
with agitation, arrhythmia, atherosclerosis, hypertension. 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Caffeine exerts all the following CNS effects, except: 
 
 
An increase in BP 
 
 
Sedation 
 
 
Psychic stimulation 
 
 
An increase in gastric secretion 
 
 
A decrease in fatigue. 

Chapter 14.  ANALEPTICS. PSYCHOMOTOR STIMULANTS 
179
 
№2. Bemegridum is: 
 
 
The antagonist of adenosine receptors 
 
 
The antagonist of barbiturate receptors 
 
 
The agonist of barbiturate receptors 
 
 
A psychomotor stimulant 
 
 
The stimulant of ACTH secretion. 
 
№3. The correct statements concerning nikethamide are: 
 
 
It is analeptic 
 
 
It has a mixed action 
 
 
It suppresses respiration 
 
 
It increases BP 
 
 
It stimulates the respiratory center. 
 
№4. Psychomotor stimulants are used for: 
 
 
Relief of pain 
 
 
Asthenia 
 
 
Attention deficit in children 
 
 
Increase the capacity to mental and physical work 
 
 
Insomnia. 
 
№5. For the prophylaxis of pneumonia after the inhalation general anesthesia 
mixed acting analeptic was used. This analeptic is administered by 
inhala-tion and includes two gaseous ingredients. What drug was most 
probably used? 
 
 
Nitrous oxide 
 
 
Cyclopropane 
 
 
Carbogenum 
 
 
Nikethamide 
 
 
Camphor. 
 
Answers: 
 
№ 1 – B; № 2 – B; № 3 – A, B, D, E; № 4 – B, C, D; № 5 – C. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 ANTIDEPRESSANTS. 
ADAPTOGENS. NOOTROPS. 
ANOREXIGENS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANTIDEPRESSANT AGENTS 
 
DEPRESSION 
 
Depression is a mood altering disease, an affective disorder. It is 
characterized by hopelessness, despair, inability to experience pleasure in ordinary 
life, a loss of interest to usual activity, suppression of appetite, sleep disturbance. 
 
There are three types of depressions: 1) reactive (or secondary); 2) 
endogenous; 3) manic-depressive disease. 
 
According to the biogenic monoamine theory, the development of depression 
results from the deficiency of monoamines (norepinephrine and serotonin) in certain 
areas of the brain. The pharmacological management of depression includes the 
regulation of adrenergic and serotoninergic processes in CNS. 
 
ANTIDEPRESSANTS 
 
Antidepressants are the drugs for the treatment of depression. 

Chapter 15.  ANTIDEPRESSANTS. ADAPTOGENS. NOOTROPS. ANOREXIGENS 
181
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
According to the mechanism of action 
A. Inhibitors of monoamine re-uptake 
 
 
Non-selective inhibitors of the monoamines re-uptake 
 
–  Imipramine (Imizinum) 
 
–  Amitriptyline 
 
 
Selective inhibitors of the serotonin re-uptake 
 
–  Fluoxetine 
 
–  Sertraline 
 
 
Selective inhibitors of the norepinephrine re-uptake 
 
–  Maprotiline 
 
B. MAO inhibitors 
 
 
Non-selective (MAO-A and MAO-B) 
 
–  Phenelzine 
 
–  Tranylcypromine 
 
–  Nialamide 
 
 
Selective (MAO-A) 
 
–  Pirlindole (Pirazidolum) 
 
–  Moclobemide 
 
C. Atypical antidepsessants 
 
–  Trazodone 
 
–  Mianserin 
 
–  Agomelatine 
 
–  Ademetionine 
 
According to the additional action 
A. Thymoleptics (+ a sedative effect) 
 
–  Amitriptyline 
 
B. Thymoerectics (+ a psychostimulating effect) 
 
–  Nialamidum 
 
C. Mixed acting 
 
–  Imipramine 
 
–  Pirlindole. 
 
IMIPRAMINE 
 
It has a tri-cyclic structure (fig. 15.1). 

182 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administrated orally or IM 
 
 
is well absorbed in the GI tract 
 
 
penetrates CNS 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver and excreted with urine and bile 
 
 
has a half-life of 4-17 hrs 
 
 
has a latent period (a therapeutic effect develops slowly in 2-3 weeks 
after the start of the treatment). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 15.1. Chemical structure of imipramine. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
The mechanism of action includes the inhibition of the norepinephrine re-
uptake resulting in an increase of adrenergic processes in brain structures 
 
(fig.15.2). 
 
 
It is also connected with the inhibition of the serotonin re-uptake resulting in 
an increase of the serotonin amount in synapses that leads to an increase in 
serotonin inhibiting influence in the limbic system (fig. 15.2). 
 
 
Imipramine and other tri-cyclic antidepressants block central and 
peripheral M-cholinoreceptors. A sedative and antimuscarinic action is 
due to such blockade. 
 
 
It also blocks α-adrenergic receptors and histamine receptors. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
an anti-depressive action 
 
 
a thymoleptic action in the emotional sphere (a sedative or weak psycho-
stimulant action) 

Chapter 15.  ANTIDEPRESSANTS. ADAPTOGENS. NOOTROPS. ANOREXIGENS 
183
 
 
Antidepressant 
 
drug blocks 
 
re-uptake of 
 
neuro- 
 
transmitter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SSRI 
SYNAPTIC 
CLEFT 
TCA 
 
 
 
Modest postsynaptic response 
 
Fig. 15.2. Mechanism of action of monoamine re-uptake inhibitors: TCA – tri-cyclic anti-
depressants; SSRI – selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (by R.Finkel et al., 2008). 
 
 
the absence of CNS stimulation or mood elevation in normal individuals 
 
 
a peripheral M-cholinoblocking action 
 
 
an antihistamine action. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Severe major depression 
 
 
Enuresis (in children older than 6 years). 

184 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Excitement 
1. Psychic excitement 
2. Insomnia 
2. Schizophrenia 
3. An increase in agitation and halluci- 3. Glacouma 
nation 
4. Adenoma of prostate 
4. Headache 
5. Atony of the urinary bladder 
5. Tremor 
6. Diseases of blood 
6. Lowering of BP, orthostatic hypo- 
7. Diabetes mellitus 
tension 
8. Tuberculosis 
7. Tachycardia, arrhythmia 
9. Infections 
8. Allergy 
10. Severe diseases of the heart, liver, 
9. Changes in the blood film 
and kidney 
10. Dry mouth 
11. Should not be taken in the evening 
11. Disturbances of accomodation 
12. Should not be taken together or 
12. An increase in intraocular pressure 
after the withdrawal of MAO- 
13. The retention of urine 
inhibitors due to the danger of 
14. Constipation 
elevation in the BP, rise in body 
15. Drug dependence. 
temperature, convulsions, coma. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER RE-UPTAKE INHIBITORS 
 
Amitriptyline has a tri-cyclic structure; is administered orally or IM, manifests an 
antidepressant action in 10-14 days after the start of the treatment; is a non-selective 
inhibitor of the monoamines re-uptake; is a thymoleptic; does not provoke agitation 
and hallucinations, does not cause insomnia; may be taken in the evening; is indi-cated 
to patients, in whom depression is accompanied by panic and anxiety; has a M-
cholinoblocking action and side-effects resulting from an antimuscarinic effect. 
 
Maprotiline is a tetracyclic antidepressant. an inhibitor of monoamines re-uptake, 
but inhibits the re-uptake of norepinephrine relatively strongly. It is used for the 
treatment of depressions of all forms and severities especially with agitation or 
anxiety; panic disorder, neuropathic pain; depressive phase in bipolar disorder; 
symptomatic relief of anxiety and tension. The side-effect profile is comparable to 
other tricyclic antidepressants, but anticholinergic effects are less prominent. 
 
Fluoxetine contains fluorine; is taken orally; a half-life is 1-10 days; is charac- 
terized by a latent period of 1-4 weeks; is a selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor 
(SSRI); possesses a psychostimulation effect; has not M-cholinoblocking and 
adrenobloking effects; is widely used to treat depression, neurotic bulemia, neurotic 
anorexia, panic disorders, some pain syndromes, premenstrual syndrome; has low 
toxicity, but may cause headache, nervousness, insomnia, appetite disturbances, skin 

Chapter 15.  ANTIDEPRESSANTS. ADAPTOGENS. NOOTROPS. ANOREXIGENS 
185
 
rash, sexual disturbances; should not be combined with non-selective MAO-
inhibitors (may cause serotonin syndrome). 
 
Sertraline is an antidepressant of SSRI class; is primarily prescribed for major 
depressive disorder in adult outpatients as well as obsessive–compulsive disorder, 
panic disorder, and social anxiety disorder in adults and children; is similar in toler-
ability profile to other SSRIs, including diarrhea, nausea, and sexual dysfunction, but 
the incidence of diarrhea is higher in comparison to other SSRIs. 
 
NIALAMIDE 
 
 
is taken orally, has a latent period of 12-14 days 
 
 
is a non-selective MAO-inhibitor: inhibits both MAO-A and MAO-B. In 
such a way prevents the inactivation of monoamines within the neuron and 
increases the release of monoamines into the synaptic space. That is why it 
increases the neurotransmission in certain areas of the brain (fig. 15.3) 
 
 
is thymoerectic 
 
 
increases the effects of adrenomimetics and sympathomimetics, is a 
reser-pine antagonist 
 
decreases pain syndromes 
 
 
is used in depressions unresponsible to tri-cyclic antidepressants, 
depressions accompanied by severe anxiety, phobic states, pain 
syndromes, neuralgia of n.trigeminus 
 
 
has side-effects, such as insomnia, headache, hypotension, dry mouth, 
constipation, a cheese syndrome (it occurs in patients treated with MAO-
inhibitors after the use of cheese, beer, and other products containing 
tyramine; manifests by hypertensive crisis and cerebro-vascular 
accidents; needs IV injection of α-adrenoblocker as emergency help). 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER MAO-INHIBITORS 
 
Pirlindole has a tetra-cyclic structure; is a selective inhibitor MAO-A with a 
reversible action; has regulatory influence on emotions: causes psychostimulation 
under the conditions of fatigue and dormancy, as well as sedation under the condi-
tions of anxiety; has not M-cholinoblocking properties; is indicated in depressions, 
manic-depressive disease, some types of schizophrenia, has low toxicity; may be 
used in patients with glaucoma, adenoma of prostate, myocardial infarction. 

186 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
Synaptic 
vesicle 
 
MAO inhibitors prevent 
inactivation of monoamines 
within a neuron, causing 
excess neurotransmitter 
to diffuse into the synaptic 
space. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inactive 
 
metabolites 
 
Norepinephrine 
 
Serotonin 
 Dopamine 
  
SYNAPTIC 
 
CLEFT 
 
 
 
POST- 
SYNAPTIC 
Postsynaptic response 
 
NEURON 
 
Fig. 15.3. Mechanism of action of MAO-inhibitors (by R. Finkel et al., 2008). 
 
CONCEPT ABOUT ATYPICAL ANTIDEPRESSANTS 
 
Atypical antidepressants are modern preparations which differ from typical 
antidepressants by their mechanism of action. This mechanism of action is repre-
sented by the blocage of α2-receptors and an increase in the norepinephrine 
release, by inhibition of serotonin receptors etc. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF PREPARATIONS 
 
Agomelatine is a melatonergic antidepressant for the treatment of major depres-
sive disorder, primarily for its favorable side-effect profile without the weight gain, 
sexual dysfunction, and severe withdrawal associated with the most commonly used 
classes of antidepressants. Agomelatine is a melatonin receptor agonist and a 5-HT2C 

Chapter 15.  ANTIDEPRESSANTS. ADAPTOGENS. NOOTROPS. ANOREXIGENS 
187
 
receptor antagonst that disinhibits noradrenaline and dopamine release in the frontal 
cortex. Due to its mechanism of action, the drug is also studied for sleep regulation. 
 
Ademetionine is hepatoprotector with antidepressant activity. It has 
choleretic and cholekinetic effect, detoxification, regenerating, antioxidant, and 
neuroprotective properties, replenishes the deficit of S-adenosylmethionine in the 
body. Indications for use are chronic cholecystitis, cholangitis, toxic liver damage, 
chronic hepatitis, liver cirrhosis, osteoarthritis, encephalopathy associated with 
hepatic failure. abstinence syndrome and depression (including secondary). The 
drug is effective in recurrent endogenous and neurotic depressions resistant to 
amitriptyline. Ademetionine is considered safe for most adults, but it can worsen 
symptoms of bipolar disorder or Parkinson’s disease. 
 
NOOTROPIC DRUGS 
 
Nootropic drugs (cognition enhancers) are the drugs for improving memory 
and ability to acquisition of new knowledge. 
 
СLASSIFICATION 
 
 
Pyrolidon derivatives 
 
–  Piracetam (Nootropil) 
 
–  Pramiracetam 
 
 
GABA derivatives 
 
–  Aminalon 
 
–  Sodium oxibutyrate 
 
–  Phenibutum 
 
–  Pantogamum 
 
–  Picamilonum 
 
 
Neuropeptides 
 
–  Sinacten-Depo 
 
–  Thyroliberin 
 
–  Melatonin 
 
–  Cerebrolysin 
 
 
Cerebrovascular drugs 
 
–  Vinpocetin (Cavinton) 
 
–  Nicergoline (Sermion) 
 
–  Pentoxyphylline 
 
–  Cinnarisine 
 
 
Pyridoxine derivatives 

188 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
–  Pyritinol (Pyriditolum, Encephabol) 
 
 
Antioxidants 
 
–  Mexidol. 
 
PIRACETAM 
 
By its chemical structure piracetam is similar to a cyclic form of GABA 
(fig.15.4). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 15.4. Chemical structure of piracetam. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, IM, IV 
 
 
is well absorbed from the GI tract, has bioavailability of 90% 
 
 
develops maximal concentration blood in 30 min after the administration; 
maximal concentration in the brain – in 1-4 hrs after the administration 
 
 
penetrates CNS and placenta 
 
 
does not metabolized in the organism 
 
 
is excreted with urine 
 
 
acts during 12 hrs. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Piracetam has a combined mechanism of action. It acts due to binding to 
receptors, as well as due to the regulation of cell metabolism. 
 
 
The influence on cognition results from the stimulation of aspartate and 
glutamate receptors, GABAA and GABAB receptors. 
 
 
It increases macromolecules synthesis, stimulates glucose metabolism 
and the production of ATP, increases the turnover of neurotransmitters, 
inhibits lipid peroxidation, normalizes the structure and functions of cell 
membranes, decreases cortical discharge of L-proline. 

Chapter 15.  ANTIDEPRESSANTS. ADAPTOGENS. NOOTROPS. ANOREXIGENS 
189
 
 
It also inhibits phosphodiesterase, increases the content of cAMP in cells, 
thus dilates blood vessels in the brain and has an anti-platelet action. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
a nootropic action: stimulation of the higher cortical function in the delay 
or disturbances of their development, improving the memory, enhancing 
cognition, the stimulation of educational process 
 
 
the regulation of emotional state (a weak dose-dependent 
psychostimulating or tranquilizing effect) 
 
a stress-protective action with the development of active forms of adaptation 
 
 
an antihypoxic action (an increase in the brain stability to hypoxia) 
 
 
a cytoprotective action (an increase in the brain stability to neurotropic 
poisons) 
 
an anti-seizure action in some forms of epilepsy 
 
 
an increase in the efficacy of the treatment by neuroleptics and 
antidepres-sants, a decrease in their side-effects 
 
a decrease of abstinence in alcohol abused persons 
 
 
the improvement of cerebral blood circulation 
 
 
the reduction of blood viscosity 
 
 
a cardioprotective action (a decrease of the myocardium lesion under the 
conditions of hypoxia). 
 
Indications 
 
A. Long-lasting treatment 
 
 
Memory disturbances with vascular, traumatic, infective, intoxication and 
somatogenic genesis 
 
Cognition disturbances in elderly patients associated with senile dementia 
and Alzheieimer’s disease 
 
Cerebral circulation disturbances, cerebral atherosclerosis 
 
 
Chronic alcoholism 
 
 
Mental deficiency in children 
 
 
Cortical myoclonus epilepsy 
 
 
Sickle-cell anemia (as an additional drug) 
 
B. Urgent therapy 
 
 
Trauma of the brain 
 
 
Edema of the brain 
 
 
Stroke 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Comatose states 
 
 
Acute intoxications with neurotropic poisons 
 
 
Abstinence in alcohol abusers 
 
 
Myocardial infarction (as an additional drug) 
 
 
Hypoxia of the fetus and newborn 
 
 
C. Use in healthy persons for improving education processes, memory, and 
adaptation. Side-effects and contraindications 
 
Piracetam is low toxic (an acute toxic dose is 10g/kg of the body weight). 
Rarely it can cause nervousness, anxiety, insomnia. 
 
The drug has no significant contraindications. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Pramiracetam is piracetam derivative, has simiar action and indications, but 
is more active and is used in saller doses. 
 
Aminalon contains GABA; in the organism, it is metabolized, crosses through 
blood-brain barier and re-synthesized into GABA, interacts with GABAA and GABAB 
receptors; has nootropic, anticonvalsant, antihypoxixc, and light antihypertesive 
effects; is used afer the disturbunces of cerebral blood circulation, for encephalopathyt, 
cerebral pulthy and mental retardation in children and kinetosis; has low toxicity. 
 
Vinpocetin (cavinton) is an alkaloid; is administered orally and IV (by IV infu-sion); 
is the inhibitor of phosphodiesterase and increases the cAMP concentration in cells; dilates 
cerebral blood vessels; improves cerebral circulation; has nootropic and antihypoxic 
actions; decreases vertigo associated with circulation disturbances; increases glucose 
metabolism in the brain; has an anti-platelet action; is indicated in acute and chronic 
disturbances of cerebral blood circulation, cerebral atherosclerosis, memory disturbances 
associated with cerebral ischemia, vertigo, the pathology of blood vessels in the retina and 
internal ear; may cause hypotension, arrhythmia, hyperemia of the face. 
 
Pentoxiphylline, by its chemical structure is similar to alkaloid theobromine; 
is administered orally, IV; is a phosphodiesterase inhibitor; dilates both cerebral 
and peripheral blood vessels of an arterial type; has an anti-platelet action; has 
nootropic action, especially associated with the pathology of cerebral circulation; 
is indicated in acute and chronic disturbances of cerebral and peripheral blood 
circulation, is-chemic stroke, diabetic angiopathia, angiopathia of ocular blood 
vessels; has such side-effects as hypotension, weakness, vertigo, hyperemia of the 
skin, dyspepsia; is contraindicated to patients with myocardial infarction, 
bleeding, hypotension, severe atherosclerosis, pregnancy. 

Chapter 15.  ANTIDEPRESSANTS. ADAPTOGENS. NOOTROPS. ANOREXIGENS 
191
 
Nicergoline (sermion) is administered orally and IV (by IV infusion); has an α-
adrenoblocking action, dilates cerebral and peripheral blood vessels, improves cerebral 
and peripheral circulation, thus displays a nootropic action in CNS; has indications 
similar to that of pentoxiphylline; may cause hypotension, a decrease in cardiac output, 
vertigo, weakness, hyperemia of the skin, pain in the epigastrium. 
 
ADAPTOGENS 
 
Adaptogens are the drugs improving adaptation and non-specific resistance 
of the organism. Majority of adaptogens have a vegetable origin (fig.15.5). 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 Preparations from medicinal plants 
 
–  Tincture of Ginseng 
 
–  Tincture of Schizandra 
 
–  Tincture of Aralia 
 
–  Liquid extract of Eleuterococcus 
 
 Preparations from animal tissues 
 
–  Pantocrinum 
 
 
A 
B 
C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 15.5. Medicinal plants containing adaptogens: 
 
A – Panax Ginseng, B – Schizandra chinensis, C – Leuzea carthamoides. 
 
All adaptogens have the common mechanism of action and similar pharmaco-
logical properties. They are taken orally. Pantocrinum may be administered IM, SC. 
 
Mechanism of action 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Mechanim of action is connected with steroidal compounds and is based 
on the activation of RNA synthesis, intensification of protein synthesis, 
stimulation of glucose metabolism and ATP synthesis, inhibition of lipid 
peroxidation. 
 
 
Regulation of the activity of the hypophysial-adrenal system is a very im-
portant component in the adaptogens’ mechanism of action. They limit 
the activity of this system under the conditions of acute stress or 
stimulate it under the conditions of chronic exhausting stress. 
  
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
an increase in resistance to unfavorable factors 
 
 
the optimization of adaptation 
 
 
a decrease in negative influence of acute and chronic stress on the organism 
 
 
an increase in physical and mental working capacity 
 
 
the restoration of normal daily rhythms 
 
 
a decrease in atherogenesis 
 
 
the stimulation of cardiovascular system, an increase in low BP 
 
 
the normalization of decreased appetite 
 
 
the stimulation of reproductive processes, especially in males 
 
 
the stimulation of non-specific immunity. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Asthenia 
 
 
Hypotension 
 
 
Vegeto-vascular dystonia 
 
 
Recovery period after infections 
 
 
Atherosclerosis 
 
 
Sexual asthenia, impotence 
 
 
Stress and adaptation in healthy persons 
 
 
Physical and mental overstrain 
 
 
Non-specific prophylaxis of infections. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Restlessness, nervousness, insomnia 
 
 
Hypertension 
 
 
Hyperglycemia. 
 
Contraindications 

Chapter 15.  ANTIDEPRESSANTS. ADAPTOGENS. NOOTROPS. ANOREXIGENS 
193
 
Insomnia, hypertension, bleeding, menstruation, severe atherosclerosis, 
organic heart lesions. Should not be taken in the evening! 
 
ACTOPROTECTORS 
 
Actoprotectors are the drugs for the stimulation of working capacity without 
following asthenia, euphoria, or drug dependance. There is a new pharmacological 
group with one preparation. 
 
BEMITHYLUM 
 
 
stimulates glucose metabolism and increases the synthesis of ATP and 
creatinphosphate 
 
stimulates physical working capacity, increases the resistance to oxygen 
insufficiency; increases the outer temperature; improves immunity 
 
is indicated in the stimulation of working capacity, asthenia, the recovery 
period after traumas and infections 
 
has minimal side-effects, but may cause headache, face hyperemia, 
dyspep-sia, nausea, vomiting, allergy. 
 
ANOREXIGENS 
 
Anorexigens are the drugs decreasing appetite due to their central activity. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 
Catecholaminergic (stimulating CNS) 
 
–  Amfepranone (Phepranonum) 
 
–  Chlorpheniramine (Desopimonum) 
 
–  Mazindol 
 
 
Serotoninergic (suppressing CNS) 
 
–  Fenfluramine. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
The 1st group preparations increase the release and decrease the re-uptake 
of norepinephrine and dopamine in CNS. That’s why they produce the 
stimulation of the saturation center resulting in a decrease of appetite and 
the limitation of the meal quantity. 

 
The 2nd group preparations decrease the concentration of serotonin in 
CNS and inhibit the limbic system influence on the hunger center. In 
such a way they decrease appetite and limit the meals quantity. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
The inhibiton of appetite, limitation of meals quantity 
 
 
A decrease in the body weight. 
 
Indications 
 
Severe alimentary and endocrinal obesity. 
 
Side-effects 
 
For the 1st group: hypertension, tachycardia, arrhythmia, anxiety, insomnia, 
dry mouth, tolerance, drug dependence. 
 
For the 2nd group: sleepiness, depression, euphoria, irritation of the gastric 
mucosa. 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. The main mechanism by which amitriptyline increases the amount of 
catecho-lamines in CNS synapses is: 
 
 
An increase in catecholamines release from the presynaptic membrane 
 
 
An increase in catecholamines synthesis in the presynaptic membrane 
 
 
The prevention of catecholamines degradation in the synapse 
 
 
The inhibition of the neuronal re-uptake of catecholamines 
 
 
The inhibition of MAO. 
 
№2. All the statements concerning adaptogens are true, except: 
 
 
They are taken orally 
 
 
They modify the activity of hypophysial-pituitary-adrenal axis 
 
 
They depresse immunity 
 
 
They are used to improve non-specific resistance 
 
 
They increase mental and physical work capacity. 
 
№3. The MAO inhibitors are: 
 
 
Among thymoerectics 
 
 
Not influencing the emotional sphere 
 
 
Causing dry mouth, blurred vision 
 
 
Causing cheese syndrome 
 
 
Without dangerous side-effects. 
 
№4. Piracetam is effective in the treatment of: 
 
 
The disturbance of movement in patients with cerebral stroke 
 
 
The retardation of mental development in children 

Chapter 15.  ANTIDEPRESSANTS. ADAPTOGENS. NOOTROPS. ANOREXIGENS 
195
 
 
Disturbances of memory after stroke 
 
 
Senile dementia 
 
 
A memory impairment in alcoholics. 
 
№5. 70-year old patient has vertigo and memory disturbances on the ground of ath-
erosclerosis. He is also suffering from the disturbances of blood flow in lower extremities. 
Which of the listed drugs is necessary to include in the complex therapy of this patient? 
 
 
Caffeine 
 
 
Pentoxiphylline 
 
 
Diazepam 
 
 
Phenazepam 
 
 
Amitryptiline. 
 
Answers: 
 
№ 1 – D; № 2 – C; № 3 – A, C, D; № 4 – B, C, D, E; № 5 – B. 

196 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 INOTROPIC DRUGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE 
 
Congestive heart failure (CHF) is a decrease in the pump function of the 
myo-cardium resulting from different causes (myocarditis, organic lesions of the 
heart, hypertensive disease etc.). CHF may be acute and chronic. It is 
accompanied by a decrease of cardiac output, the enhancing of venous pressure 
and lowering of arterial pressure. Such processes lead to a decrease in the renal 
blood flow, the stimulation of renin and aldosterone secretion, sodium and water 
retention in the body with the development of edema (fig. 16.1). 
 
INOTROPIC DRUGS 
 
Inotropic drugs are preparations, which increase the force of myocardium 
contraction and cardiac output without a significant increase in oxygen consumption. 
 
They are divided into cardiac glycosides (steroidal inotropic drugs) and non-
glycoside inotropic drugs (non-steroidal) (fig. 16.2). 

Chapter 16.  INOTROPIC DRUGS 
197
 
 
 
Cardiac failure 
 
 
 
 Venous pressure 
 Cardiac output 
 Capillary filtration 
 Arterial pressure 
 Sympathetic 
activity 
 Renal blood flow 
 Sodium and water retention 
 
 
Edema 
 
Fig. 16.1. Pathogenesis of congestive heart failure. 
 
 
 
Inotropic drugs 
 
 
Cardiac glycosides 
Non-steroidal 
inotropic drugs 
 
Fig. 16.2. Two groups of inotropic agents. 
 
CARDIAC GLYCOSIDES 
 
Origin 
 
Cardiac glycosides are inotropic drugs from medicinal plants (fig.16.3). The 
sources of main glycosides are: 
 
–– Digitalis purpurea (Fox gloves) for digitoxin 
 
–– Digitalis lanata for digoxin 
 
–– Strophanthus Kombe for strophanthin-K 
 
–– Strophanthus gratus for strophanthin G (Quabain) 

198 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
A 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.16.3. Medicinal plants containing cardiac glycosides: A – Digitalis lanata; 
 
B – Adonis vernalis; C – Strophanthus combe; D – Convallaria majalis. 

Chapter 16.  INOTROPIC DRUGS 
199
 
–– Convallaria majalis (lily of the valley) for corglycon 
 
–– Adonis vernalis for adonisidum, infusion from the herb of adonis. 
 
History of development 
 
The modern era of the treatment with the digitalis glycosides began with the 
work of William Withering, who publised his famous book “ An Account of the 
Foxglove and Some of Its Medical Uses” in 1785. Withering was aware that 
digitalis was only effective in certain forms of dropsy or edema, and recognized 
that the drug acted on the heart. 
 
Chemical structure 
 
All cardiac glycosides have similar structure including glycone and aglycone. 
This structure may be represented as follows: Cardiac glycoside = glycone + aglycone. 
Glycone contains sugar moieties and determines pharmacokinetics. Aglycone contains 
a steroid structure with lactone ring and determines pharmacodynamics (fig. 16.4). 
 
 
A 
                      B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DIGITOXIGENIN 
DIGITOXOSE 
 
Fig. 16.4. Structural parts of cardiac glycoside digitoxin: 
 
digitoxigenin as aglycone (A) and digitoxose as glycone (B). 
 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
According to the origin 
 
 Group of Digitalis 
 
–  Digitoxin 
 
–  Digoxin 
 
–  Celanidum (Lantosidum C) 
 
–  Adonisidum 
 
–  Infusion from the herb of adonis (Infusum herbae Adonidis vernalis)) 

200 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 Group of Strophanthus 
 
–  Strophanthin-K 
 
–  Strophanthin-G (Quabain) 
 
–  Corglycon 
 
–  Tincture of Convallaria 
 
According to the duration of action 
 
 Long-acting 
 
–  Digitoxin 
 
 Intermediate-acting 
 
–  Digoxin 
 
–  Celanidum 
 
 Short-acting 
 
–  Strophanthin 
 
–  Corglycon. 
 
Mechanism of action 
Mechanism of a positive inotropic action 
 
Lactone ring binds to SH-groups of Na +/K+ ATP-ase that results in the 
revers-ible inhibition of proton pump. Such inhibition leads to a decrease in Na+ 
transport from the cell and a decrease in K+ entry. An increase in the intracellular 
Na+ content causes the accumulation of Ca++ in the cell (fig. 16.5). Under the 
influence of high Ca++ concentration the interaction between actin and myosin is 
more active and the force of heart contractions increases. 
 
Na+ 
Na/K-ATPase 
CG 
Na+ 
Na+ 
Coupling 
Ca2+ 
Ca2+ 
K+ 
K+ 
K+ 
 
Heart muscle cell 
CG 
 
Fig. 16.5. Mechanism of cardiac glycosides’ (CG) inotropic action (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 

Chapter 16.  INOTROPIC DRUGS 
201
 
Mechanism of a negative chronotropic action 
 
There are two parts in this mechanism: a vagal and an extravagal action. The 
vagal action is due to the reflexive and direct stimulation of the n.vagus center. 
The extravagal action is due to the direct inhibition of SA and the AV nodes and 
hyper-sensitization of SA node to acetylcholine. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
a positive inotropic effect (an increase in the force of systole, an increase 
in the myocardial tone) 
 
a negative chronotropic effect (the prolongation of diastole, slowing of 
heart rate) 
 
a negative dromotropic effect (deceleration of conductivity) 
 
 
a positive bathmotropic effect (an increase in myocardium excitation, 
manifests as extrasystoles in the overdose of cardiac glycosides) 
 
the improvement of blood circulation 
 
 
a decrease in venous pressure, normalization of arterial blood pressure 
 
 
an increase in renal blood flow, which leads to an increase in diuresis and 
a decrease in edema. 
 
Phases of digitalis therapy 
 
 
The phase of digitalization is a saturation of the organism by cardiac glyco-
sides (1-7 days). The preparation is administered in a full therapeutic dose. At 
the end of this phase the compensation of heart failure should be obtained. 
 
 
The phase of supporting therapy is a long (durative) treatment by an indi-
vidual small dose of cardiac glycoside which is sufficient for heart com-
pensation. Heart rate should not be less than 60 per 1 minute. 
 
 
The pre-toxic phase is the beginning of overdose. The heart rate is less 
than 60 beats per 1 minute. The drug should be abolished. 
 
The toxic phase (acute intoxication). 
 
Digitalis toxicity 
 
Signs (fig. 16.6): 
 
–– bradycardia, then tachycardia and arrhythmia (premature ventricular 
beats, fibrillation) 
 
–– an increase in signs of heart failure 
 
–– changes in ECG 
 
–– hypokalemia 
 
–– anorexia, vomiting, nausea 

202 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
–– headache, fatigue, hallucinations 
 
–– vision disturbances (xantopsia, micropsia, macropsia). 
 
 
Disturbance 
 
of color vision 
 
Digitalis 
Digitalis 
 
Excitation of 
 
N. vagus: 
 
Heart rate  
 
 
Area postrema: 
 
nausea, vomiting 
 
Fig. 16.6. Signs of Digitalis toxicity (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Treatment of Digitalis intoxication: 
 
–– abolishing of cardiac glycoside 
–– drugs containing potassium (potassium chloride; panangin) 
–– SH-group donator (Dimercaprol, or Unithiol) 
–– anti-arrhythmic agents (phenytoin, lidocaine, propranolol, atropine for 
AV block) 
–– digoxin antibodies (digibind) 
–– glucose, vitamin preparations, oxygen inhalation. 
 
Potassium preparations must be administered for prophylaxis of digitalis toxicity. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF PREPARATIONS 
 
Digitoxin 
 
 
is a typical representative of the Digitalis group 
 
 
is lipid-soluble, non-polar 
 
is administered orally or rectally, is well absorbed in the GI tract (90-100%), 
binds to plasma proteins (95%), is metabolized in the liver; forms a hepatic-
intestinal cycle of re-circulation, is excreted with urine and bile; begins to 

Chapter 16.  INOTROPIC DRUGS 
203
 
act slowly in 2-4 hrs after the administration; has a long durative action with 
a half-life of 4-7 days, stays in the organism during 21 days, accumulates 
 
 
has a negative chronotropic effect which exceeds inotropic and other 
effects on its significance 
 
is used in chronic heart failure of I-II B stages, supraventricular tachyar-
rhythmia 
 
may cause hypokalemia, bradycardia, AV block, intoxication 
 
 
is contraindicated in poisoning with cardiac glycosides, bradycardia, AV 
block, acute myocardial infarction, severe aortal and mitral stenosis, 
potas-sium deficiency, childhood. 
 
Digoxin 
 
 
is water- and lipid-soluble 
 
 
is intermediate-acting glycoside from Digitalis lanata 
 
 
may be administered orally and IV, is well absorbed in the GI tract (60-
85%), binds to plasma proteins less than digitoxin (20-25%), may re-
circulate, begins to act soon after the IV administration, has a half-life of 
36-48 hrs, accumulates less than digitoxin 
 
 
has less influence on AV conductivity than digitoxin 
 
 
is used in chronic CHF, supraventicular tachyarrhythmia, acute CHF, an 
attack of arrhythmia (IV) 
 
is less toxic, may be used in children and in patients with a non-severe AV block. 
 
Celanidum 
 
The drug is similar to digoxin, but is absorbed worse in the GI tract and after 
the IV administration starts to act faster than digoxin. 
 
Strophanthin 
 
 
is a typical preparation from Strophanthus group 
 
 
is water-soluble, polar 
 
 
is administered IV (as an exclusive case, may be administered IM together 
with procaine or sublingually); is not absorbed in the GI tract (only 5% of a 
dose), does not bind to plasma proteins, has no re-cycling, is not metabolized 
in the body, is excreted with urine, starts to act in 10-15 min after the ad-
ministration, develops a maximal effect in 1,5-2 hrs after the administration; 
has a half-life of 8 hrs; stays in the organism to 24 hrs; does not accumulate 
 
 
has a strong positive inotropic action which is the most significant among 
other effects 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
is used to treat acute heart failure, attack of supraventricular arrhythmia 
as well as for rapid digitalization 
 
 
as a rule, does not cause intoxication. 
 
 
Corglycon 
 
The drug is similar to strophanthin, but begins to act slower. 
 
Infusion from the herb of adonis 
 
 
is galenic preparation which contains glycosides from Adonis vernalis 
 
 
is taken orally, does not accumulate 
 
 
is weaker than all other preparations 
 
 
has a sedative and direct diuretic action 
 
 
is used for the treatment of light forms of CHF, cardioneurosis, neurosis 
(is combined with valerian and bromides) 
 
 
has low toxicity. 
 
NON-STEROIDAL INOTROPIC DRUGS 
 
These inotrops improve cardiac pump function by adrenergic mechanisms or 
the inhibition of phosphodiesterase III. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 Adrenomimetics 
 
–  Dobutamine (β1-adrenergic agonist) 
–  Dopamine (β1-adrenergic agonist) 
–  Isoprenaline (β1-, β2- adrenergic agonist) 
–  Ephedrine (α-, β- adrenergic agonist) 
 
 Selective phosphodiesterase III (PDE III) inhibitors 
 
–  Amrinone 
 
–  Milrinone. 
 
 Calcium sensitizers 
 
–  Levosimendan (Simdax) 
 
DOBUTAMINE 
 
 
is a non-glycoside inotropic agent 
 
 
is similar to dopamine by its chemical structure 

Chapter 16.  INOTROPIC DRUGS 
205
 
 
is administered by IV infusion 
 
 
is a selective agonist of β1-adrenoceptors in the heart (fig. 16.7) 
 
has a positive inotropic action, improves coronary circulation, reduces 
peripheral resistance, redistributes blood flow in favor of the heart and 
lungs, increases the renal blood flow, does not act on heart rate; does not 
cause hypertension 
 
 
is used in acute heart failure, cardiogenic shock 
 
 
may cause tachycardia, arrhythmia. 
 
 
DOBUTAMINE 
 
 
Stimulation of β-adrenoceptors 
 
in the heart 
 
 
 
a Induction of intracellular reactions: activation 
of adenylate cyclase and  of cAMP activation of 
protein kinase, phosphorilation of Ca++ channel and  
of Ca++entry 
 
 
AN INCREASE IN FORCE OF 
 
MYOCARDIUM CONTRACTIONS 
 
Fig. 16.7. Mechanism of dobutamine’s action. 
 
LEVOSIMENDAN 
 
 
is is non-glycoside inotropic agent, calcium sensitizer 
 
 
is administered by IV infusion; hemodynamic effects persist for at least 24 
hrs and can be observed up to 9 days after discontinuation of 6 hrs infusion 
 
 
exerts positive inotropic effect by binding to troponin C in a calcium-
dependent manner; has vasodilatory effect by opening of ATP-sensitive K+ 
channels in vascular smooth muscle; combined inotropic and vasodilatory 
actions result in the increased force of contraction, decreased preload and 
afterload; has cardioprotective effect due to opening the mitochondrial 
 
ATP-sensitive K+-channels in cardiomyocytes 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
is indicated in acutely-decompensated severe CHF if conventional 
therapy is not sufficient. 
 
side effects include headache, hypotension, arrhythmias, myocardial is-
chemia, hypokalemia and nausea. 
  
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Only one inotropic drug has a non-glycoside structure: 
 
 
Digoxin 
 
 
Digitoxin 
 
 
Dobutamine 
 
 
Corglyconum 
 
 
Infusion from the herb of adonis. 
 
№2. The main effects of cardiac glycosides include all, except: 
 
 
An increase in the strength of myocardium contractions 
 
 
A decrease in heart rate 
 
 
A decrease in the conductivity of the heart 
 
 
An increase in neurotransmission in CNS 
 
 
The improvement of blood circulation. 
 
№3. Digitalis toxicity is characterized by the following: 
 
 
Disturbances of color vision 
 
 
Hypokalemia 
 
 
Heart block 
 
 
Ventricular tachyarrhythmia 
 
 
Hyponatremia. 
 
№.4. Acute heart failure may be treated by: 
 
 
Strophanthin (ampoules) 
 
 
Corglyconum (ampoules) 
 
 
Digitoxin (rectal suppositoria) 
 
 
Digoxin (tablets) 
 
 
Celanidum (ampoules). 
 
 
5. Digoxin in tablets was prescribed to a patient with chronic CHF. After 1 
month of treatment a decrease in heart rate was noted; the doctor advised to 
the patient to continue the treatment with a lower dose of digoxin. In 

spite of this, bradycardia was soon transformed into AV block. Choose 
the necessary drug for the abolishing of this manifestation of glycoside 
toxicity. 
 
 
Potassium chloride 
 
 
Diphenin 
 
 
Atropine 
 
 
Lidocaine 
 
 
Propranolol. 
 
Answers: 
 
№1 – C; №2 – D; №3 – A, B, C, D; №4 – A, B, E; №5 – C. 

208 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 ANTIANGINAL DRUGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANGINA PECTORIS 
 
Angina pectoris is one of the forms of ischemic heart disease. Two other 
forms are myocardial infarction and cardiosclerosis (fig. 17.1). 
 
 
 
Ischemic heart disease 
 
 
 
Angina pectoris 
Myocardial infarction 
Myocardial sclerosis 
 
Fig. 17.1. Ischemic heart disease and its forms. 

Chapter 17.  ANTIANGINAL DRUGS 
209
 
Angina pectoris is characterized by a sudden, severe pressing or acute chest 
pain radiating to the left arm and neck. Anginal pain occurs when the oxygen 
supply to myocardium is insufficient for its needs. The imbalance between oxygen 
delivery and utilization may result from a spasm or from the obstruction of heart 
blood ves-sels (fig. 17.2). The coronary blood flow is insufficient to meet the 
heart’s metabolic requirements. It causes the onset of anginal pain. 
 
Heart Attack 
  
Blood 
Artery 
 
clot 
 
 
Cgolesterol 
plaque 
 
 
 
 
 
Coronary arteries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Healthy muscle 
 
Dying muscle 
 
Fig. 17.2. Pathogenic factors of angina attack 
 
and myocardial infarction (http://www.picsearch.com). 
 
ANTIANGINAL DRUGS 
 
Antianginal drugs are preparations which delay or prevent angina attack. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Drugs that decrease oxygen demand of myocardium and increase oxygen 
supply 1. Organic nitrates 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
–  Nitroglycerine (glyceril trinitrate, GTN) 
 
–  Isosorbide dinitrate 
 
–  Isosorbide mononitrate 
 
–  Sustac 
 
 
Calcium channel blockers 
 
–  Verapamil 
 
–  Nifedipine 
 
–  Amlodipine 
 
B. Drugs that decrease oxygen demand of myocardium 
 
 
β-adrenoblockers 
 
–  Propranolol 
 
–  Metoprolol 
 
–  Talinolol 
 
–  Atenolol 
C. Drugs that increase oxygen supply 
 
 
Substances of myotopic action 
 
–  Dipyridamole 
 
–  Papaverine 
 
–  Drotaverine (No-spa) 
 
 
Substances of the reflexive mechanism of action 
 
–  Validol 
D. Drugs acting on myocardial metabolism 
 
–  Sodium adenosine triphosphate 
 
–  Mildronate (Meldonium) 
 
–  Trimetazidine 
 
–  Corvitin 
 
 
DRUGS THAT DECREASE OXYGEN 
 
DEMAND AND INCREASE OXYGEN SUPPLY 
 
ORGANIC NITRATES 
 
NITROGLYCERINE 
 
The drug has a chemical structure of glyceril trinitrate (fig. 17.3); is lipid- and 
alcohol-soluble. 

Chapter 17.  ANTIANGINAL DRUGS 
211
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken sublingually 
 
 
is well absorbed from the oral cavity 
 
 
does not undergo hepatic first-pass metabolism after the sublingual 
administration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 17.3. Chemical structure of nitroglycerine. 
 
 
starts to act in 15-30 sec, develops peak concentration in 3-5 min after the 
administration 
 
 
is metabolized in erythrocytes and in the liver with the formation of 
active metabolites (mono- and dinitrates) 
 
 
finally is inactivated in the liver by conjugation 
 
 
is excreted with urine and air 
 
 
stays in the organism during 30-45 min. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Nitrate (NO2) is transformed into nitrous oxide (= NO, endogenous 
endothe-lial-derived relaxation factor, EDRF). 
 
 
It binds to SH-groups of nitrate receptors. 
 
 
That results in activation of guanylate cyclase and leads to an increase in 
the cGMP content in cells and a decrease in the Ca++ entry. 
 
 
Such processes lead to the dephosphorilation of the myosin light chain 
and relaxation of vascular smooth muscles (fig. 17.4). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
the dilation of venous vessels, pooling of blood in the veins, as a result, 
the redistribution of blood in the body and a decrease in preload on the 
myocardium 
 
 
the dilation of arterial vessels, a decrease in total peripheral vascular 
resist-ance, as a result, a decrease in afterload on the myocardium 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
a decrease in load on the myocardium resulting in a decrease of oxygen 
demand 
 
the dilation of coronary vessels, redistribution of the coronary blood flow 
in favor of the area of ischemia and an increase in oxygen supply 
 
 
the inhibition of impulses from the vasomotor center 
 
 
the relaxation of the smooth muscles of bronchi and the biliary system. 
 
• 
  
R – O – NO2 
 
 
 
 
Release of NO 
 
 
 
Activation of guanylate cyclase 
 
 
 
GTP 
cGMP 
 
 
Relaxation of endothelial and smooth muscle cells 
 
Fig. 17.4. Mechanism of nitroglycerine’s action. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Angina pectoris attack 
 
 
Thrombosis of the central vein of the retina 
 
 
Combined therapy of hypertensive crisis 
 
 
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea 
 
 
Myocardial infarction and edema of lungs (a special medicinal form of 
nitroglycerine for IV injections is used). 
 
Side-effects 

Chapter 17.  ANTIANGINAL DRUGS 
213
 
 
Headache (as a result of the dilation of blood vessels in brain tunics and 
increasing of intracranial pressure; may be diminished by the applying of 
Validolum or non-narcotic analgesics) 
 
 
Hypotension, postural hypotension, collapse (may be treated by Mesatonum) 
 
 
Reflex tachycardia 
 
 
Pain in eyes, an increase in intraocular pressure (as a result of dilation of 
ocular blood vessels) 
 
Flushing of the skin (as a result of the dilation of blood vessels in the skin) 
 
 
Tolerance (as a result of the oxidizing of SH-groups of nitrate receptors; 
may be overcome by the provision of a daily “nitrate-free interval” and 
by the use of thiodrugs or antioxidants) 
 
 
Overdose (the forming of methemoglobin, hypoxia, collapse, respiratory 
failure; needs the administration of Methileni coeruleum as an antidote). 
 
Contraindications 
 
 
Hypersensitivity 
 
 
Hypotension 
 
 
Myocardial infarction accompanied by hypotension 
 
 
Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy 
 
 
Aortic and mitral stenosis 
 
 
Cardiac tamponade 
 
 
Constrictive pericarditis 
 
 
An increase in intracranial pressure (trauma of the brain, hemorrhagical insult) 
 
 
Glaucoma. 
 
LONG-ACTING NITRATES 
 
Sustac is tablets for the oral administration which contain microcapsules of 
nitroglycerine; exists in two forms: sustac-mite with a lower dose and sustac-forte 
with a higher dose of nitroglycerine; is slowly absorbed from the gut; begins to act 
in 30-60 min after the administration and acts during 4-6 hrs; is used for the 
preven-tion of an angina attack. 
 
Isosorbide dinitrate is used in the form of tablets, spansules, spray, injections; 
after sublingual administration begins to act in 3-20 min and acts during 1-2 hrs; as an 
oral form, has an onset of action in 30-60 min and duration of action 2-10 hrs; may be 
administered in coronary blood vessels by special systems in a clinic; is used for the 
prevention, as well as for the termination of an angina pectoris attack. 

214 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 17.5. Mechanism of action of calcium channel blockers (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Isosorbide mononitrate begins to act in 15-30 min and acts during 6-12 hrs; 
is an active metabolite of isosorbide dinitrate and has better bioavailability; is used 
for the prevention of an angina attack. 
 
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS 
 
Calcium channel blockers (calcium antagonists) are preparations which 
block calcium channels of L-type and cause an antianginal, anti-arrhythmic and 
antihy-pertensive action. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
According to the chemical structure 
 
 Phenylalkylamines 
 
–  Verapamil 
 
 Dihydropyridines 
 
–  Nifedipine (Phenigidine) 

Chapter 17.  ANTIANGINAL DRUGS 
215
 
–  Amlodipine 
 
 Benzodiazepines 
 
–  Diltiazem 
 
According to generations 
 
 The first generation 
 
–  Verapamil 
 
–  Nifedipine 
 
–  Diltiazem 
 
 The second generation 
 
–  Nifedipine-retard 
 
 The third generation 
 
–  Amlodipine. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
These drugs block voltage-gated “L-type” calcium channels and decrease 
Ca++ entry in the cells of the myocardium and the smooth muscles of blood vessels 
(fig.17.5). 
 
Reduction of intracellular calcium concentration leads to a decrease in the ac-
tivation of Ca++-ATP-ase, a decrease in phosphate utilization, deceleration of slow 
diastole depolarization of membranes. 
 
The result is a decrease in the contractility, excitability, and automaticity of 
myocardium, relaxation of smooth muscles and dilation of blood vessels. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
the dilation of blood vessels, the reduction of total peripheral resistance, 
the redistribution of blood in the body, a decrease in the load on the 
myocardium resulting in a decrease of oxygen consumption 
 
 
the dilation of coronary arteries and arterioles resulting in the an increase 
of oxygen supply 
 
a decrease in AV and SA node conduction, the prolongation of the effective 
refractory period within the AV node resulting in an anti-arrhythmic action 
 
 
the dilation of peripheral blood vessels resulting in a decrease of BP and 
an antihypertensive action 
 
an anti-platelet action and a decrease in blood viscosity 
 
 
the relaxation of the smooth muscles of uterus, bronchi, and the gut. 
 
Indications 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Angina pectoris 
 
 
Hypertension 
 
 
Tachyarrhythmia. 
 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Verapamil is a calcium channel blocker from the first generation; is adminis-
tered orally and IV; is well absorbed in the GI tract; develops a peak concentration in 
1-2 hrs; has a half-life of 3-6 hrs; undergoes first-pass biotransformation in the liver; is 
excreted with urine; has a strong action on heart rate, as well as vasodilation; is used 
for the treatment of tachyarrhythmia, angina pectoris, hypertension, for the termination 
of arrhythmia paroxysm; may cause AV block, heart failure, an increase in digitalis 
toxicity when it is given together with digitalis preparations. 
 
Nifedipine is a calcium channel blocker from the first generation; is adminis-
tered orally and sublingually; begins to act in10 min after sublingual 
administration; displays peak level in 30 min; has a half-life of 3-6 hrs; has strong 
vasodilation and weak action on heart rate; is used for angina pectoris, especially 
for Prinzmetal’s angina, for the control of hypertension; may cause reflexive 
tachycardia, hypoten-sion, peripheral edema. 
 
Amlodipine is a calcium channel blocker from the third generation; is taken 
orally; is absorbed in the GI tract more fully and slower than nifedipine; binds to 
plasma proteins stronger; is metabolized minimally; has long period of half-
excretion; does not cause tachycardia. 
 
DRUGS DECREASING OXYGEN 
 
DEMAND OF MYOCARDIUM 
 
β-ADRENOBLOCKERS 
 
These preparations block β-adrenoceptors and limit adrenergic stimulation of the 
heart (fig.17.6). In such a way, they decrease the heart rate, striking and minute vol-
ume of the myocardium. The result is a decrease in the consumption of oxygen by the 
myocardium that leads to the limitation of ischemia and hypoxia in the heart muscle. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Propanolol (Anaprilin) is administered orally, IV; is absorbed in the GI tract; 
binds to proteins in blood serum; penetrates CNS; acts during 3-4 hrs; blocks both β1-
and β2-adrenoceptors; decreases the heart contractility, striking and minute volume, as 

Chapter 17.  ANTIANGINAL DRUGS 
217
 
a result, decreases the consumption of oxygen by myocardium (antianginal 
effect); decreases the excitability and conductivity of the myocardium, decreases 
the heart rate (an anti-arrhythmic effect); decreases cardiac output and renin’s 
secretion in the kidney, thus lowers BP (an antihypertensive effect); also 
decreases intraocular pressure; has a sedative action; is used to treat ischemic heart 
disease (the prevention of an angina pectoris attack, myocardial infarction); 
supraventricular tachyarrhythmia; hypertension; hyperthyroidism; migraine; 
glaucoma; has side-effects, such as: brady-cardia, AV block, heart failure, 
hypotension, worsen of peripheral blood circulation, a spasm of bronchi, gastric 
ulcer, hypoglycemia (when insulin is co-administered), weakness, drowsiness. 
  
β-ADRENOBLOCKERS 
 
 
EPINEPHRINE 
 
Blockade of β-adreno-ceptors 
 
in the heart 
 
 
 heart rate 
 
 cardiac output 
 
 
 consumption of O2 
ANTIANGINAL ACTION 
by myocardium 
 
Fig. 17.6. Antianginal action of β-adrenoblockers. 
 
Metoprolol has a cardioselective action on β1-receptors; is taken orally for 
the treatment of hypertension, angina pectoris, and arrhythmia, may be 
administered IV in acute cases, has less side-effects than propranolol, does not 
produce a spasm of bronchi and the stimulation of gastric secretion, may be used 
in patients with bronchial asthma, ulcerative disease, and diabetes mellitus. 
 
Talinolol has a cardioselective action on β 1-receptors, has inner 
sympathomi-metic activity and a membrane stabilizing effect (does not inhibits 
the heart contrac-tility and conductivity), has less side-effects and less 
contraindications connected with the influence on β2-adrenoceptors. 

218 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Atenolol is a preparation of a cardioselective action (on β1-receptors), is 
similar to metopolol in the action, but acts longer, does not penetrate CNS. 
 
DRUGS INCREASING OXYGEN 
 
SUPPLY IN MYOCARDIUM 
 
Validol 
 
 
is a menthol derivative 
 
is taken sublingually 
 
 
has a reflexive mechanism of action: irritates sensitive nerve endings in 
the oral mucous membrane and initiates reflex changes in the vasomotor 
center activity, thus dilates coronary blood vessels, increases the oxygen 
supply in the myocardium and terminates an angina attack 
 
 
is less active than nitroglycerine 
 
 
is used for the termination of an angina pectoris attack 
 
 
has no significant side-effects; may cause glossitis if it is taken very often. 
 
Dipyridamole 
 
 
is administered orally or IV 
 
 
inhibits adenosine desaminase, decreases the re-uptake of adenosine by 
myocardiocytes and erythrocytes, increases the concentration of 
adenosine in plasma resulting in the dilation of coronary vessels and an 
increase in the oxygen supply 
 
 
produces the dilation of coronary vessels, an increase in the amount of 
col-lateral vessels in the myocardium, the improving of coronary blood 
flow; an increase in coronary sinus oxygen saturation, anti-platelet action 
 
 
is used for the prevention of an angina pectoris attack (is less effective than 
nitrates and other drugs), for the prevention of thrombosis and re-thrombosis 
in patients with atherosclerosis or prosthetic cardiac valves; for the treatment 
of disturbances of cerebral and peripheral blood circulation 
 
 
may cause side-effects, such as hypotension, flushing of the skin, 
headache, dyspepsia, a syndrome of “stealing” in the myocardium (the 
dilation of normal coronary vessels is more intensive than that of vessels 
with athero-sclerotic lesions and the drug redistributes coronary blood 
flow in favor of the normal areas of the myocardium with the worsening 
of blood supply in the area of ischemia) (fig. 17.7). 
 
Papaverine 

Chapter 17.  ANTIANGINAL DRUGS 
219
 
 
is an isoquinoline derivative, an opium alkaloid 
 
 
is taken orally, IM, IV; acts about 4 hrs 
 
 
is phosophodiesterase inhibitor, increases the cAMP concentration in cells by 
which dilates coronary and systemic blood vessels, relaxes smooth muscles 
 
 
produces the dilation of coronary blood vessels and an increase in the oxy-
gen supply; the dilation of systemic vessels and a decrease in BP; a decrease 
in a spasm of smooth muscles in the gut, biliary and urinary pathways 
 
 
is used for the prevention of an angina attack (the effectiveness is low), 
hypertension, spasms of smooth muscles, colic 
 
may cause weakness, somnolence, constipation, disturbances of AV 
conduc-tion in high doses, a syndrome of “stealing”. 
DROTAVERINE (NO-SPA) 
 
Drotaverine is a phosphodiesterase inhibitor. It is more potent and less toxic than 
papaverine, but in angina pectoris is also used rarely, because the efficacy is low. 
 
Blood flow 
 
 
Blood vessels with 
 
atherosclerotic 
 
plague 
Normal blood 
vessels 
 
 
 
 
DRUG 
 
Different intencity of drug's action on 
 
normal and atherosclerotic coronary 
 
vessels results in redistribution of 
 
blood from ischemic area to normal 
 
one 
 
Fig. 17.7. Mechanism of “stealing” syndrome. 
 
DRUGS ACTING ON MYOCARDIUM METABOLISM 

220 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Drugs acting on metabolism in the myocardium are additional drugs in the 
treatment of angina pectoris. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Mildronate (Meldonium) is a drug improving metabolism and energy supply 
of tissues, synthetic analogueue of γ-butyrobetaine; inhibits γ-butyrobetaine 
hydroxi-nase, reduces the synthesis of carnitine and transport of long-chain fatty 
acids through the cell membranes, prevents accumulation of activated forms of 
non-oxidized fatty acids, restores the balance between oxygen delivery and its 
consumption in the cells, warns violation of ATP transport; activates glycolysis, 
stimulates production of nitric oxide in the vascular endothelium; pharmacological 
effects include reducing the mental and physical overstrain, cardioprotective 
action, vasodilation, activation of immunity, reducing blood glucose concentration 
and prevention of diabetic complica-tions. antihypoxic and anticonvulsant effects; 
is used in angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, CHF, stroke and cerebrovascular 
insufficiency, reduced working capac-ity, abstinence syndrome, vascular diseases 
of the eye; has minimal side effects; is contraindicated to sportsmen as doping. 
 
Trimetazidine is anti-ischemic metabolic agent, which improves myocardial 
glucose utilization through inhibition of fatty acid metabolism by blocking of g-
chain 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase (fatty acid oxidation inhibitor): has antianginal, 
coronarolytic, antihypoxic, ad neuroprotective effects; is used for prevention of 
angina attacksas well as for the treatment of cardiac ischemia; chorioretinal 
vascular disorders, vertigo of vascular origin, dizziness in Meniere's disease, 
tinnitus; has high safety and tolerability profile. 
 
ATP-long is complex compound of ATP and metals (sodium and 
magnesium); is taken orally; is well absorbed in the gut; enhances ATP content in 
myocardium; limits ischemia; improves contractility; has anti-arrhythmic action; 
is the additional drug in prophylaxis of angina attack. 
 
Corvitin contains bioflavonoid quercetin, which modulates the activity of 
enzymes involving in the degradation of phospholipids, influencing free radical 
pro-cesses and nitric oxide biosynthesis, has antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, 
antiallergic, anticancer, and cardioprotective effects, increases force and 
normalizes the rhythm of heart; effect is administered by IV infusion in 
myocardial infarction, decompensation of CHF, acute and chronic ischemic 
disturbances of cerebral circulation, reperfusion syndrome under the surgical 
treatment of obliterating atherosclerosis of the aorta and peripheral arteries. 
 
TREATMENT OF ANGINA IN PATIENS 
 
WITH CONCOMITANT DISEASES 

Chapter 17.  ANTIANGINAL DRUGS 
221
 
The choice of drugs for the treatment of angina pectoris is grounded on the 
form of the disease (stable, non-stable, varient), as well as on the presence of 
concomitant diseases (table17.1). 
 
Table 17.1. Choice of drugs for angina 
 
pectoris with concomitant diseases 
 
Concomitant disease 
Drugs commonly used in treating angina 
None 
Long-acting nitrates, 
β-adrenoblockers, 
сalcium channel blockers 
Recent myocardial infarction 
Long-acting nitrates, 
β-adrenoblockers 
Bronchial asthma 
Long-acting nitrates, 
calcium channel blockers 
Hypertension 
Long acting nitrates*, 
β -adrenoblockers, 
calcium channel blockers 
Diabetes 
Long acting nitrates, 
calcium channel blockers 
Chronic renal diseases 
Long-acting nitrates, 
β-adrenoblockers*, 
calcium channel blockers* 
 
 – less effective drugs. 
 
 
PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT 
 
OF MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION 
 
Myocardial infarction is the formation of the area of necrosis in the myocardium 
due to local ischemia resulting from the obstruction of blood vessel, most commonly 
by thrombus or embolus. It manifests by persistent intense cardiac pain, diaphore-sis, 
pallor, hypotension, faintness, nausea, vomiting. Myocardial infarction may be 
complicated by acute heart failure and cardiogenic shock. 
 
Main groups of preparations for treatment of myocardial infarction and 
goals of their administration: 
 
For analgesia: narcotic analgesics, nitrous oxide 
 
 
For a decrease in ischemia: organic nitrates (nitroglycerine), β-adrenoblockers 
 
 
For a decrease in arrhythmia: anti-arrhythmics (lidocaine, amiodarone, 
polarizing solution), β-adrenoblockers 
 
 
For the inhibition of blood coagulation: anticoagulants (heparin) 

 
For the lysis of thrombus: thrombolytics: (streptokinase, alteplase) 
 
 
For a decrease in acute heart failure: inotrtopic drugs (dobutamine), va-
sodilators. 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
 
1. Nitroglycerine causes all the listed side-effects, 
except: A. The delay of AV conduction 
 
B. Reflex tachycardia 
C. Tolerance 
 
D. Hypotension 
E. Headache. 
 
№2. The calcium channel blocker for the treatment of hypertension and 
angina pectoris is: 
 
 
Nitroglycerine 
 
 
Nifedipine 
 
 
Drotaverine 
 
 
Papaverine. 
 
 
Propranolol. 
 
№3. The drugs for emergency help in an angina pectoris attack are: 
 
 
Propranolol (Anaprilinum) 
 
 
Verapamil 
 
 
Validolum 
 
 
Isosorbide dinitrate 
 
 
Nitroglycerine. 
 
№4. The following statements concerning antianginal drugs are true: 
 
 
Isosorbide mononitrate is an active metabolite of isosorbide dinitrate 
 
 
Calcium channel blockers cause a “stealing syndrome” 
 
 
Propranolol is a long-acting nitrate 
 
 
Validolum has a reflexive mode of action 
 
 
Dipyridamol is a coronarolytic and anti-platelet drug. 
 
№5. A patient with ischemic disease has not informed the doctor that he had had 
attacks of bronchospasm. The doctor prescribed a drug which has made the 
attacks of angina pectoris less frequent, but the attacks of bronchospasm 
have become more frequent. What medicine has been prescribed? 
 
A. Atenolol 

Chapter 17.  ANTIANGINAL DRUGS 
223
 
 
Propranolol 
С. Verapamil D. 
Diltiazem 
 
E.  Isosorbide dinitrate. 
 
Answers: 
 
№ 1 – A; № 2 – B; № 3 – C, D, E; № 4 – A, D, E; № 5 – B. 

224 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 ANTI-ARRHYTHGMICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CARDIAC RHYTHM AND ITS DISORDERS 
 
Each heart beat originates as an electrical impulse from a small area of tissue 
in the right atrium of the heart called the sinus node or Sino-atrial node (SA node) 
(fig. 18.1). The impulse initially causes both of the atria to contract, then activates 
the atrio-ventricular (or AV) node which is normally the only electrical connection 
between the atria and the ventricles or main pumping chambers. The impulse then 
spreads through both ventricles via the His-Purkinje fibers causing a synchronized 
contraction of the heart muscle, and thus, the pulse. 
 
The cardiac action potential is a s pecialized action potential (AP) in the heart. 
 
There are 5 phases in cardial AP (fig. 18.2). 
 
The resting membrane potential is caused by the difference in ionic 
concentra-tions and conductances across the membrane of the cell during phase 4 
of the AP. The normal resting membrane potential in the ventricular myocardium 
is about -85 to -95 mV. This potential is determined by the selective permeability 
of the cell membrane to various ions. The membrane is most permeable to K+ and 
relatively impermeable to other ions. If the resting membrane potential becomes 
too positive, the cell may not be excitable, and conduction through the heart may 
be delayed, increasing the risk for arrhythmias. 

Chapter 18.  ANTI-ARRHYTHGMICS 
225
 
 
 
Sinus node 
 
 
Atrium 
 
 
AV-node 
 
 
Bundle of His 
 
 
Tawara's 
node 
 
Purkinje 
fibers 
 
 
Ventricle 
 
Fig. 18.1. Electrical conduction system of the heart (http://www.picsearch.com). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
Fig. 18.2. Cardiac action potential (Phases 0-4). 

226 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Phase 0 is the rapid depolarization phase. This phase is due to the opening of the 
fast Na+ channels causing a rapid increase in the membrane conductance to Na+ (table 
18.1). Phase 1 of the AP occurs with the inactivation of the fast Na+ channels. The 
transient net outward current causing the small downward deflection of the AP is due 
to the movement of K+ and Cl- ions. Phase 2 (the “plateau” phase) of the cardiac AP is 
sustained by a balance between the inward movement of Ca++ through L-type calcium 
channels and the outward movement of K+ through the slow delayed recti-fier 
potassium channels. During Phase 3 (the “rapid repolarization” phase) of the AP, the 
L-type Ca++ channels close, while the slow delayed rectifier K+ channels are still open. 
The delayed rectifier K+ channels close when the membrane potential is restored to 
about -80 to -85 mV. Phase 4 is slow spontaneous depolarization during diastole 
caused by an inward positive current of Na+ and Ca++. 
 
Table 18.1. Ionic currents and states 
 
of Na+channels during cardiac action potential 
 
Phase of action 
Ionic currents 
States of Na+ channels 
potential 
Phase 0 
Fast Na+ entry 
Open (active) 
Phase 1 
K+ and Cl- movement 
Closed, opening impossible 
(inactivated) 
Phase 2 
Slow Ca++ entry, outward K+ 
Closed, opening impossible 
movement 
(inactivated) 
Phase 3 
K+ efflux 
Closed, partly can be activated 
Phase 4 
Closed, opening possible 
 
Cardiac arrhythmia (also dysrhythmia) is a term for any from a large and 
het-erogeneous group of conditions in which there is abnormal electrical activity 
in the heart. They may occur due to the disturbances of impulse formation, 
disturbances of impulse conduction, or both. 
 
Any part of the heart that initiates an impulse without waiting for the SA 
node is called an ectopic focus. Premature beat caused by an impulse from the 
ectopic focus is named extrasystole. 
 
Re-entry arrhythmias occur when an electrical impulse recurrently travels in 
a tight circle within the heart, rather than moving from one end of the heart to the 
other and then stopping. Re-entry circuits are responsible for atrial flutter, most 
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardias, and dangerous ventricular tachycardia. 
 
When an entire chamber of the heart is involved in a multiple micro-reentry 
circuits, and therefore quivering with chaotic electrical impulses, it is said to be in 
fibrillation. 

Chapter 18.  ANTI-ARRHYTHGMICS 
227
 
There are many kinds of heart arrhythmias. The heart beat may be too fast or 
too slow, and may be regular or irregular. Some arrhythmias are life-threatening 
medical emergencies that can result in a cardiac arrest and sudden death. They are 
divided into tachyarrhythmias with the heart rate of more than 80 beats per min 
and bradyarrhythmias when the rate is less than 60 beats per min. According to 
the site of initiation arrhythmias may by atrial and ventricular. Paroxismal atrial 
tachyarrhythmia, atrial flutter, ventricular flutter, atrial fibrillation, extrasystolia, 
ventricular fibrillation belong to tachyarrhythmias. Bradycardia is often associated 
with AV block. 
 
Restoration of heart rate may be achieved by pharmacotherapy or 
cardioversion (an electrical shock). 
 
ANTI-ARRHYTHMIC DRUGS 
 
Anti-arrhythmics are a group of pharmaceuticals that are used to suppress 
fast rhythms of the heart (cardiac arrhythmias), such as atrial fibrillation, atrial 
flutter, ventricular tachycardia, and ventricular fibrillation. 
 
VAUGHAN WILLIAMS 
 
ANTI-ARRHYTHMICS CLASSIFICATION 
 
The Vaughan Williams classification is one of the most widely used classifica-
tion schemes for anti-arrhythmic agents. Anti-arrhythmics designed for the treatment 
of tachyarrythmias are classified on the base of their electrophysiological effects. 
They are represented by 4 classes. Class I drugs exert their effect by the inhibition of 
Na+ channels: subclass IA blocks Na+ channels which are in the open state; subclass IB 
– both in activated and inactivated states; subclass IC includes the most potent agents 
with a more significant action on open channels. Class II drugs increase the refractory 
period of the AV node. Drugs of the class III block K+ channels resulting in the 
prolongation of repolarization (Phase 1 and 3). Class IV blocks Ca++slow inward 
movements during Phase 2, thus increasing the duration of the refractory period. 
 
This scheme classifies a drug based on the primary mechanism of its anti-
arrhythmic effect. However, its dependence on primary mechanism is one of the 
limitations of this classification, since many anti-arrhythmic agents have multiple 
action mechanisms. Another limitation is the lack of consideration within the clas-
sification system for the effects of drug metabolites. A historical limitation was 
that drugs, such as digoxin and adenosine – important anti-arrhythmic agents – 
had no place at all in the Vaughan Williams classification system. This has since 
been recti-fied by the inclusion of class V. 

228 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Class I. Membrane stabilizing agents (Na+ channel blockers) 
 
 
Subclass IA 
 
–  Quinidine 
 
–  Procainamide 
 
–  Disopyramide 
 
 
Subclass IB 
 
–  Lidocaine 
 
–  Phenytoin 
 
–  Mexiletine 
 
 
Subclass IC 
 
–  Propafenone 
 
–  Flecainide 
 
–  Ethacyzin 
 
B. Class II. β-adrenoblockers 
 
–  Propranolol 
 
–  Metoprolol 
 
 
Class III. K+ channel blockers 
 
–  Amiodarone 
 
–  Dronedarone 
 
–  Bretylium 
 
–  Sotalol 
 
 
Class IV. Ca++channel blockers (agents affect the AV node) 
 
–  Verapamil 
 
–  Diltiazem 
 
 
Class V. Agents of other or unknown mechanisms 
 
 
Cardiac glycosides 
 
–  Digitoxin 
 
–  Digoxin 
 
 
Potassium preparations 
 
–  Pananginum. 
 
 Magnesium preparations 
 
– Rythmocor 
 
– Magnesium orotate 
 
 Adenosine. 
 
CLASS I. MEMBRANE STABILIZING AGENTS 

Chapter 18.  ANTI-ARRHYTHGMICS 
229
 
SUBCLASS IA 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Class IA agents block the fast Na+channels and inhibit the Na+ influx. 
 
 
Blocking of these channels depresses the Phase 0 depolarization, which 
prolongs the AP duration by slowing conduction (fig. 18.3). 
 
Agents in this class also cause decreased conductivity and increased re-
fractoriness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 18.3. Effect of class IA anti-arrhythmic agents on cardiac action potential. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Supraventricular tachycardia 
 
 
Ventricular tachycardia 
 
 
Symptomatic ventricular premature beats 
 
 
The prevention of ventricular fibrillation. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Qiunidine is an alkaloid, isomeric form of quinine; is taken orally, has the 
duration of action of 6-8 hrs; inhibits excitability, automaticity, and conductivity in the 
atria, AV node, bundle of His and Purkinje fibers, inhibits ectopic arrhythmias, 
ventricular arrhythmias caused by increased normal automaticity, prevents re-entry 
arrhythmias, decreases the contractility of the myocardium, has M-cholinoblocking 
properties and can induce tachycardia in normal individuals; is used in the treat-ment 
of atrial, AV junctional, and ventricular arrhythmias, is applied to maintain the sinus 
rhythm after the direct current cardioversion; may cause the deformation of the QRS 
complex, some kinds of ventricular tachyarrhythmia, heart block, asystole, 

230 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
heart failure, hypotension, weakness, headache, vision disturbances, spastic pain 
in the abdomen, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, hemolytic anemia (as a manifestation 
of idiosyncrasy), thrombocytopenia, skin rash, itch; is contraindicated to patients 
with hypersensitivity, AV block, poisoning with cardiac glycosides, serious 
disturbances of ventricular conduction, hypotension, hypokalemia, pregnancy. 
 
Procainamide is a procaine derivative; is administered orally, IM, IV, has a 
half-life of 2-3 hrs, is acetylated in the liver to N-acetylprocainamide which has 
properties of class III drug; is not toxic, does not inhibit contractility; may cause 
side-effects, such as AV block, reversible lupus erythematosus-like syndrome, 
nausea, vomiting, seizures, asystole, and the induction of ventricular arrhythmias 
(in overdose). Procainamide can be used in the treatment of atrial fibrillation in the 
setting of Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome, and in the treatment of a 
wide complex of hemodynamically stable tachycardias. While procainamide and 
quinidine may be used in the conversion of atrial fibrillation to the normal sinus 
rhythm, they should only be used together with an AV node blocking agent. 
 
Disopyramide is similar to quinidine; is administered orally and parenterally 
(IV); increases the refractory period in atria, inhibits conduction in the bundle of 
His, produces a negative inotropic effect (which is greater than the effect of qui-
nidine and procainamide), has M-cholinoblocking properties; is used in atrial and 
ventricular premature beats, supraventricular tachyarrhythmia, is more effective in 
the treatment of ventricular arrhythmia; may cause worsening of arrhythmia, heart 
failure, hypotension, dry mouth, blurred vision, retention of urination, headache, 
allergic reactions; is contraindicated in AV block, denominated bradycardia, heart 
failure, cardiogenic shock. 
 
SUBCLASS IB 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Class IB antiarrhythmic agents are Na+channel blockers. 
 
 
They increase membranes permeability for the influx of K+ and decrease 
the permeability for the K+ efflux. 
 
Class IB agents have fast onset and offset kinetics, meaning that they have a 
little or no effect at slower heart rates, and more effects at faster heart rates. 
 
Class IB agents shorten the AP duration and reduce refractoriness (fig.18.4). 
 
Indications 
 
 
Ventricular tachycardia 
 
 
Symptomatic premature ventricular beats 

Chapter 18.  ANTI-ARRHYTHGMICS 
231
 
 
The prevention of ventricular fibrillation. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Lidocaine is a local anesthetic; is administered IV, IM, by IV infusion, is 
widely distributed in the body tissues, is metabolized in the liver, is excreted with 
urine, acts during 6-8 hrs; blocks Na+ channels, increases the K+ efflux, accelerates 
repolariza-tion, inhibits Phase 2, inhibits Phase 4 in Purkinje fibers, that’s why 
decreases their automaticity, decreases the re-entry; unlike quinine, lidocaine 
suppresses arrhythmias caused by abnormal automaticity, does not influence the 
atria; is more effective in ventricular tachyarrhythmia; is the drug of choice for the 
emergency treatment of cardiac arrhythmias; may cause vertigo, disturbances of 
consciousness, seizures, suppression of respiration, nausea, vomiting, hypotension, 
collapse, bradycardia, arrhythmia, asystole, shock, allergy; is contraindicated in 
hypersensitivity, epilepsy, AV block, bradycardia, weakness of the SA node. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 18.4. Effect of class IB anti-arrhythmic agents on the cardiac action potential. 
 
Mexiletine is a stable preparation; is taken orally; is used for the chronic 
treat-ment of ventricular arrhythmias associated with previous myocardial 
infarction; may cause nausea, vomiting, nistagmus, blurred vision. 
 
Phenytoin is an anti-epileptic drug; is administered orally and IV; in the 
myo-cardium it decreases the K+ loss caused by cardiac glycosides, inhibits 
premature beats in acute poisoning by cardiac glycosides, improves blood 
circulation in the heart, lowers BP; is used in acute poisoning with cardiac 
glycosides, heart surgeries, arrhythmias of central origin. 
 
SUBCLASS IC 

232 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Class IC anti-arrhythmic agents markedly depress the Phase 0 repolariza-
tion (fig. 18.5). 
 
 
They decrease conductivity, but have a minimal effect on the AP duration. 
 
 
Of the sodium channel blocking anti-arrhythmic agents (the class I anti-
arrhythmic agents), the class IC agents have the most potent Na+ channel 
blocking effects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 18.5. Effect of class IC anti-arrhythmic agents on cardiac action potential. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Life-threatening ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation 
 
 
Refractory supraventricular tachycardia (atrial fibrillation). 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Propafenone is administered orally, IV; has membrane-stabilizing properties, is β-
adrenoblocker and calcium antagonist, decreases automaticity, inhibits the conduction of 
excitement in the AV node, bundle of His and Purkinje fibers; is used in ventricular 
tachyarrhythmia, if other remedies are ineffective; may cause postural hypotension. 
 
Flecainide is taken orally, undergoes minimal biotransformation, and has a half-
life of 16-20 hrs; suppresses Phase 0 upstroke in Purkinje and myocardial fibers, 
causes the slowing of conduction in all cardiac tissue with a minor effect of on the 
duration of AP and refractoriness, reduces automaticity; is used in treating refractory 
ventricular arrhythmias, is particularly useful in suppressing of premature ventricular 
contractions; may cause dizziness, blurred vision, headache, nausea, aggravation of 
CHF, induction of some kinds of dangerous ventricular arrhythmias. 

Chapter 18.  ANTI-ARRHYTHGMICS 
233
 
Ethacyzin is the antiarrhythmic drug class IC for oral administration with pro-
longed action; increases the duration of refractory periods of the atria and AV node, 
slows the rate of increase in the AP in the atrial and ventricular fibers of Purkinje, 
suppresses sinoatrial conduction; has negative inotropic effect, local anesthetic and 
spasmolytic activity; is indicated in the ventricular and supraventricular extrasystole, 
paroxysms of fibrillation and atrial flutter, ventricular and supraventricular tachy-
cardia, including in the syndrome of premature ventricular excitation; may cause such 
side effects as siinus node block, AV blockade, violation of intraventricular 
conduction, decreased myocardial contractility and coronary blood flow, secondary 
arrhythmia. dizziness, headache, drowsiness; diplopia, paresis of accommodation, 
nausea, pain in the epigastric area. 
 
CLASS II. β-ADRENOBLOCKERS 
 
Mechanism of anti-arrhythmic action 
 
 
β-adrenoblockers block β1-adrenoceptors, prevent the action of catechol- 
amines on the myocardium. 
 
These drugs diminish Phase 4 depolarization. 
 
 
As a result, they prolong the refractory period and decrease conductivity. 
 
 
They act by slowing conduction through the AV node. 
 
 
They depress automaticity. 
 
 
Thus β-adrenoblockers decrease the heart rate and contractility. 
 
Indications 
 
Tachyarrhythmia caused by increased sympathetic activity 
 
Atrial flutter and fibrillation 
 
AV nodal re-entrant tachycardia. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
AV block 
 
 
Bradycardia 
 
 
Worsening in CHF. 
 
A complete pharmacological characteristics of β-adrenoblockers is presented 
 
in Chapter 8. 
 
CLASS III. K+ CHANNEL BLOCKERS 

234 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
Mechanism of acion 
 
 
Class III agents predominantly block the K+ channels, thereby prolonging 
repolarization (fig. 18.6). 
 
Since these agents do not affect the Na+ channel, conduction velocity is 
not decreased. 
 
The prolongation of the AP duration and refractory period, combined 
with the maintenance of normal conduction velocity, prevents re-entrant 
arrhythmias. 
 
 
Class III anti-arrhythmic agents exhibit reverse use dependent 
prolongation of the AP duration. This means that the refractoriness of the 
ventricular myocyte increases at lower heart rates. This increases the 
susceptibility of the myocardium to early after-depolarizations at low 
heart rates. Anti-arrhythmic agents that exhibit reverse use-dependence 
are more efficacious at preventing a tachyarrhythmia that converting 
someone into normal sinus rhythm. Because of the reverse use-
dependence of class III agents, at low heart rates class III anti-arrhythmic 
agents may paradoxically be more ar-rhythmogenic. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 18.6. Effect of class III anti-arrhythmic agents on cardiac action potential. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Amiodarone is a benzofuran derivative, contains iodine and is related structur-
ally to thyroxine; is administered orally or IV; binds to plasma proteins (95% of the 
drug), is metabolized in the liver (main metabolite is desethylamiodarone which 
strengthens the anti-arrhythmic action of the drug), is excreted with bile, has a half-life 
of 20-100 days; displays complex effects showing class I, II, III, and IV actions, blocks 
K+ channels, blocks Ca++ and Na+ channels; modifies the condition of α- and 

Chapter 18.  ANTI-ARRHYTHGMICS 
235
 
β-adrenoceptors, as well as glucagons receptors (non-competitive antagonism); 
increases the duration of AP and the refractory period in the ventricular and atrial 
muscle; has an anti-arrhythmic action; produces systemic and coronary vasodilation 
resulting in antianginal action; is used for the treatment of ventricular arrhythmia, 
ventricular fibrillation in patients of the risk group, supraventricular tachyarrhyth-mias, 
angina pectoris; myocardial infarction, for the prevention of sudden coronary death; 
may cause side-effects, such as pulmonary fibrosis (reversible), bradycardia, AV 
block, phototoxicity, corneal microdeposits and blurred vision, hyper- and hy-
pothyroidism, ataxia, tremor, myopathy and neuropathy, anorexia, nausea, vomiting; is 
contraindicated in patients with sinus bradycardia, AV block, syndrome of sinus node 
weakness, diseases of the thyroid gland, pulmonary fibrosis, hypersensitivity to iodine, 
pregnancy, lactation. The course of treatment must have a provision of two days 
“drug-free interval” every week. 
Dronedarone is anti-arrhythmic indicated to use in adult patients in a stable 
clinical condition who have previously suffered or are having atrial fibrillation; 
has chemical structure similar to amiodarone, but without iodine and with lower 
lipophi-licity, is multichannel blocker of K+-, Na+, and Ca++ channels, is non-
competitive antagonist of adrenergic receptors, reduces BP and myocardium 
contractility, has vasodilating action that is more pronounced in the coronary 
arteries; can cause CHF, bradycardia. dysgeusia, liver lesions, diarrhea, vomiting, 
nausea, abdominal pain, dyspepsia, dermatitis, asthenia; provokes risk of cardio-
vascular death after the long usage. 
 
Bretylium tosilate is administered IV, IM, is excreted unchanged with urine; has 
a potent anti-arrhythmic effect in ventricular arrhythmias; increases the duration of the 
refractory period in Purkinje fibers, has a sympatholytic action, decreases BP; is used 
for ventricular fibrillation, mainly in the acute period of myocardial infarction or in 
resistance to electrical defibrillation; may cause severe postural hypotension, transitory 
tachycardia 
and 
ectopic 
beats, 
nausea, 
vomiting; 
is 
contraindicated 
in 
pheochromacytoma, acute disorders of brain blood circulation, hypotension, collapse, 
severe renal failure, aortal stenosis, pulmonary hypertension, pregnancy, lactation. 
 
Sotalol is a β-adrenoblocker and anti-arhythmic of class III; is administered 
orally and IV; is effective in many cases of supraventricular tachyarrhythmia, 
especially in atrial fibrillation, supraventricular tachycardia, the WPW syndrome, 
ventricular tachycardia; is more effective than class I drugs in preventing of 
arrhyth-mia recurrence and in decreasing of mortality in patients with sustained 
ventricular tachycardia has side-effects connected with β-adrenoblocking 
properties (bradycardia, worsening in CHF). 

236 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
CLASS IV. Ca++ CHANNEL BLOCKERS 
 
Mechanism of anti-arrhythmic action 
 
 
Ca++channel blockers block calcium channels of L-type. 
 
 
They inhibit Ca++entry into the cells of the conductive system in the heart. 
 
 
Result is the inhibition of automaticity and re-entry. 
 
 
They do not the act on conductivity. 
 
Indications 
 
Supraventricular tachyarrhythmia 
 
Fibrillation of atria, atrial flutter 
 
Paroxismal tachycardia. 
 
Common properties of Ca++ channel blockers and peculiarities of some 
prepara-tions are described in chapter 17. 
 
CLASS V. AGENTS OF OTHER 
 
OR UNKNOWN MECHANISMS 
 
CARDIAC GLYCOSIDES 
 
Cardiac glycosides (e.g. digoxin) shorten the refractory period in atrial and 
ventricular myocardial cells while prolonging the effective refractory period and 
diminishing conduction velocity in Purkinje fibers. 
 
They are used to control the ventricular response rate in atrial fibrillation and 
flutter. 
 
Other pharmacological properties of cardiac glycosides are described in 
Chapter 16. 
POTASSIUM AND MAGNESIUM PREPARATIONS 
 
Potassium preparations (e.g., Pananginum) increase the speed of 
spontaneous depolarization in SA and AV nodes, as well as in all conduction 
system, thus inhibits the automaticity. They also normalize Phase 0. These drugs 
are used to treat tachyar-rhythmias, especially caused by hypokalemia. 
 
Magnesium preparations (Magnesium orotete) and combained drugs 
containing magnesium and potassium (Rythmiucor) also can be used. 
 
ADENOSINE 

Chapter 18.  ANTI-ARRHYTHGMICS 
237
 
Adenosine is a nucleoside which is administered IV and have a very rapid 
and short action, is uptaken by red blood cells. It stimulates A1-adenosine 
receptors in the SA node. In high doses, adenosine decreases conduction velocity, 
prolongs the refractory period, and decreases the automaticity in AV node. It is the 
drug of choice for abolishing acute supraventricular tachycardia. Adenosine is not 
toxic, but may cause flushing, chest pain, hypotension. 
 
DRUGS FOR BRADYARRHYTHMIA AND AV BLOCK 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 M-cholinoblockers 
 
–  Atropine 
 
 Adrenomimetics 
 
–  Isoprenaline 
 
–  Ephedrine. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Atropine is a non-selected M-cholinoblocker, has a dose-dependent action on 
the heart rate. At low doses, the predominant effect is a decreased heart rate 
(bradycar-dia) due to blockade of M1-receptors on the inhibitory pre-junctional 
neurons. With higher doses of atropine, the cardiac receptors on the SA node are 
blocked, and the cardiac rate increases (tachycardia). 
 
Isoprenaline is a non-selective β-adrenergic agonist, stimulates β1-
adrenoceptors in the heart and increases the heart rate. 
 
Ephedrine is a indirect-acting adrenomimetic, has a presynaptic action, 
stimu-lates the norepinephrine release and its action on adrenergic receptors in the 
heart, in such a way increases the cardiac rate and causes tachycardia. 
 
All these drugs are described as autonomics in Chapters 6, 7. 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№ 1. All of the following correctly characterizes the drug, except: 
 
 
Procainamide blocks Na+ channels 
 
 
Amiodarone blocks K+ channels 
 
 
Verapamil blocks Ca++ channels 
 
 
Bretylium blocks K+ channels 
 
 
Quinidine blocks Ca++ channels. 
 
№ 2. Incorrect statement concerning lidocaine is: 

 
It is administered parenteraly 
 
 
It is class IA anti-arrhythmic 
 
 
It is metabolized in the liver 
 
 
It shortens an action potential 
 
 
It is the drug of choice in ventricular fibrillation. 
 
№ 3. The drugs for the maintenance of the cardiac rhythm after the cardioversion are: 
 
 
Quinidine 
 
 
Adenosine 
 
 
Digoxin 
 
 
Procainamide 
 
 
Disopyramide. 
 
№ 4. Adenosine: 
 
 
Is given only IV 
 
 
Has the shortest duration of action 
 
 
Is class III anti-arrhythmic 
 
 
Stimulates A1-adenosine receptors 
 
Is used for the termination of acute supraventricular tachyarrhytmia. 
 
№ 5. To maintain the normal sinus rhythm, a patient with atrial fibrillation was pre-
scribed with anti-arrhythmic drug containing iodine. This drug has very long 
duration of action and may cause reversible pulmonary fibrosis and corneal 
microdeposits. What preparation was prescribed? 
 
 
Procainamide 
 
 
Propranolol 
 
 
Sotalol 
 
 
Amiodarone 
 
 
Mexiletine. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – E; № 2 – B; № 3 – A, D, E; №  4 – A, B, D, E; № 5 – D. 

Chapter 19.  ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS. HYPERTENSIVE AGENTS 
239
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS. 
HYPERTENSIVE AGENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HYPERTENSION 
 
Hypertension is a sustained diastolic blood pressure greater than 90mm Hg 
accompanied by an elevated systolic blood pressure (more than 140 mm Hg). 
Chronic hypertension leads to: 
 
–– congestive heart failure 
 
–– myocardial infarction 
 
–– renal damage 
 
–– cerebrovascular accidents. 
 
Arterial blood pressure (BP) is the sum of cardiac output and peripheral 
resist-ance. Cardiac output depends on the heart rate and contractility. Peripheral 
resistance depends on the blood vessels tone and the volume of circulating blood. 
 
Regulation of blood pressure level 
 
Increased sympathetic activity leads to the activation of β1-adrenoceptors in 
the heart and results in the enhance of cardiac output. It also causes stimulation of 
α1-adrenoceptors and an increase in peripheral resistance. 

240 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
The renin-angiotensin system takes part in the regulation of vasoconstriction 
and volume of blood. The activation of this system is caused by the stimulation of 
angiotensin receptors by angiotensin II. It leads to vasoconstriction, an increase in 
vascular peripheral resistance, retention of sodium and water. These processes 
results in the enhance of BP and an increase in the load on the myocardium. 
 
Main links of pathogenesis of hypertension 
 
Hypertension is a result of disregulation in the cardio-vascular system and 
water-electrolytes balance. Its development is connected with: 
 
 
Disturbances in the ratio between inhibition and stimulation in the cortex 
of the brain 
 
 
Changes in activity of the vasomotor center 
 
 
Activation of sympathetic stimulation of the heart and blood vessels 
 
 
Changes in blood vessels wall 
 
 
The activation of renin-angiotensin system 
 
 
An increase in the blood volume. 
 
 
ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS 
 
Antihypertensive drugs are drugs for the treatment of hypertension. 
 
Treatment strategies: 
 
 
mild hypertension can be controlled with one drug 
 
 
severe hypertension must be treated with the combination of drugs 
 
 
drugs for the combined therapy of hypertension are selected to minimize 
the side-effects of the combined regimen 
 
“first-line” drugs are diuretics, β-adrenoblockers, inhibitors of angiotensin 
converting enzyme (ACE), calcium channel blockers, α-adrenoblockers. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Neurotropic agents 
 
 Drugs decreasing vasomotor center activity (centrally acting α2-
adrenomimetics and imidazoline receptor agonists) 
 
– Clonidine (Clophelinum) 
 
– Methyldopa 
 
– Moxonidine 
 
 
Anti-adrenergic drugs 

Chapter 19.  ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS. HYPERTENSIVE AGENTS 
241
 
 
α-Adrenoblockers 
 
–  Prazosin 
 
–  Doxazosin 
 
 
β-adrenoblockers 
 
– Propranolol (Anaprilin) 
 
– Metoprolol 
 
– Atenolol 
 
– Bisoprolol 
 
 
α,β-adrenoblockers 
 
–  Labetolol 
 
–  Carvedilol 
 
 
Adrenergic neuron blocking agents (sympatholytics) 
 
–  Reserpine 
 
–  Guanethidine (Octadinum) 
 
 
M-cholinoblocker 
 
–  Platyphylline 
 
 N- cholinoblockers (ganglionic blockers) 
 
– Hexamethonium 
 
– Pentamine 
 
 
Ca++ channel blockers 
 
–  Nifedipine 
 
–  Verapamil 
 
– Amlodipine 
 
– Diltiazem 
 
 
Magnesium salts 
 
–  Magnesium sulfate 
 
 
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors 
 
–  Papaverine 
 
–  Drotaverine (No-Spa) 
 
–  Bendazole (Dibazolum) 
 
 
Potasium channel openers 
 
–  Appressin 
 
–  Minoxidil 
 
–  Diazoxide 
 
 
Other vasodilators 
 
–  Sodium nitroprusside 

242 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
C. Drugs acting on renin-angiotensin system 
 
 
ACE inhibitors 
 
–  Captopril 
 
–  Enalapril 
 
–  Lisinopril 
 
– Fosinopril 
 
 
Angiotensin II receptor antagonist 
 
–  Losartan 
 
– Temisaetan 
 
 Renin inhibitors 
 
– Aliskiren 
 
–  Hydrochlorothiazide 
 
–  Furosemide. 
 
DRUGS DECREASING VASOMOTOR 
 
CENTER ACTIVITY 
 
CLONIDINE 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered sublingually, orally, IV, IM 
 
 
is completely absorbed in the GI tract 
 
 
after IV or sublingual administration, begins to act in 5-10 min, after oral 
administration – in 30-60 min 
 
penetrates CNS 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver and excreted with urine 
 
 
acts during 2-12 hrs. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
The drug stimulates α2-adrenoceptors in CNS. 
 
The stimulation of presynaptic α2-adrenoceptors and imidazoline receptors 
I1 in the adrenergic synapsis of the vasomotor center results in the inhibi-
tion of the norepinephrine release into the synaptic gap and a decrease in 
sympathetic impulsation to peripheral blood vessels. 
 
 
That leads to the dilation of blood vessels, lowering of BP, and slow heart 
rate. 

Chapter 19.  ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS. HYPERTENSIVE AGENTS 
243
 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
a decrease in BP (antihypertensive action ) 
 
 
a decrease in heart rate and cardiac output 
 
 
a decrease in renin activity 
 
 
sedation 
 
 
a decrease in pain 
 
 
a decrease in intra-ocular pressure 
 
 
the potentiation of other drugs inhibiting CNS. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Acute hypertension (hypertension crisis) 
 
 
Chronic hypertension 
 
 
Glaucoma (eye drops) 
 
 
Migraine 
 
 
Pain syndromes 
 
 
Chronic alcoholism 
 
 
The potentiation of general anesthesia. 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Weakness, somnolence 
1. Severe atherosclerosis 
2. Hypotension, postural hypotension 
2. Job needed a quick reaction 
3. Transitory elevation of BP after the IV or 
3. Should not be given 
sublingual administration (resulting from 
together with alcohol and 
the stimulation of peripheral adrenoceptors) 
psychotropic drugs. 
 
Constriction of blood vessels in the brain 
 
 
Dry mouth 
 
 
Inhibition of gastric secretion 
 
 
Constipation 
 
 
Retention of sodium and water 
 
 
Changes in glucose level in blood 
 
 
Abolishing syndrome. 
 
METHYLDOPA 
 
 
is taken orally, is well absorbed in the GI tract, penetrates CNS, starts to 
act slowly 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
is similar to norepinephrine by chemical structure, that’s why acts as “a 
false mediator” in CNS: stimulates α2-adrenocepotors and decreases the 
norepinephrine release in synapses of the vasomotor center; by this 
mecha-nism it decreases the activity of the vasomotor center, inhibits 
sympathetic impulsation to blood vessels, dilates blood vessels and 
lowers BP (is a centrally acting sympatholytic) 
 
 
has an antihypertensive action, improves cerebral blood flow, increases 
lactation 
 
is used for the treatment of hypertension 
 
 
has side-effects which are similar to the same of clonidine, also may 
cause muscular and joint pains, a rise in the body temperature, skin rash, 
galac-torrhea 
 
 
is contraindicated to patients suffering from depression, Parkinson’s 
disease, liver diseases. 
  
MOXONIDINE 
 
 
is a selective agonist of the imidazoline receptor I1 in the medulla of 
brain; therefore causes a decrease in sympathetic nervous system activity 
and a decrease in BP 
 
 
It lowers BP, promotes sodium excretion, improves condition of patients 
with insulin resistance syndrome and prevents renal and cardiac 
complica-tions of hypertension 
 
 
is a second-line antihypertensive drug for the treatment of mild to 
moderate essential hypertension 
 
may cause dry mouth, headache, fatigue, dizziness, intermittent facial edema, 
nausea, sleep disturbances, asthenia, vasodilation, and skin reactions 
 
ANTI-ADRENERGIC DRUGS 
 
α-ADRENOBLOCKERS 
 
Prazosin and doxazosin selectively block α1-adrenoceptors, dilate blood 
vessels, reduce peripheral vascular resistance and decrease BP. They are taken 
orally for the treatment of mild to moderate chronic hypertension. 
 
β-ADRENOBLOCKERS 

Chapter 19.  ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS. HYPERTENSIVE AGENTS 
245
 
β-adrenoblockers (propranolol, metoprolol etc) are the “first-line” 
preparations for chronic hypertension. They are taken orally to control 
hypertension. A full effect develops in several weeks. 
 
Mechanism of antihypertensive action 
 
 
β-adrenoblockers lower BP due to blockage of β1-adrenoreceptors in the 
heart and a decrease in cardiac output. 
 
 
They also block β1-adrenoreceptors in the kidney and inhibit renin secretion 
resulting in a decrease of peripheral resistance and blood volume (fig. 19.1). 
 
Action on cardiac output develops quickly and leads to a decrease in sys-
tolic pressure. 
 
 
Action on renin-angiotensin system develops in a few days and leads to a 
decrease of diastolic pressure and stable lowering of BP. 
 
 
β-ADRENOBLOCKERS 
 
 β1-adrenoreceptors 
 renin secretion 
in the heart 
 cardiac output 
 angiotensin 
 Na+, water retention 
 peripheral resistance 
 blood volume 
 
 
 
Fig. 19.1. Mechanism of antihypertensive action of β-adrenoblockers. 
 
α,β-ADRENOBLOCKERS 
 
Labetalol and carvedilol act both on α- and β-adrenoceptors, but action on β-
receptors is more significant. They produse lowering BP mediated by the blockade 
of β-adrenoceptors and vasodilation due to blockade of. α-adrenoceptors 
 
SYMPATHOLYTICS 
 
Reserpine acts in peripheral tissues, as well as in CNS (a sedative and neuroleptic 
action); is used for mild forms of hypertension; produces sodium and water retention; 

246 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
is combined with thiazide diuretics; may cause disturbances of sleep, depression, 
and side-effects connected with prevanence of PANS. 
 
Guanetidine (Octadinum) is a potent peripherally acting sympatholytic; is used 
for severe forms of hypertension; begins to act slowly (in 2-4 days after the start of 
treatment); may cause postural hypotension, and side-effects connected with PANS 
prevalence in the body (bradycardia, a spasm of bronchi, increased activity of the gut). 
 
Adrenoblockers and sympatholytics belong to autonomic and are described in 
detail in chapter 8. Cholinergic drugs for managment of acute and chronic hyperte-
sion are characterized in the Chapter 6. 
 
MYOTROPIC VASODILATORS 
 
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS 
 
Calcium channel blockers (nifedipine, verapamil, amlodipine) have an anti-
hypertensive action resulting from the dilatation of blood vessels and a decrease in 
peripheral vascular resistance. They are suitable for chronic use in hypertension of 
any severity. The choice of calcium channel blockers is grounded on the effect of 
the drug on cardiac pacemakers and contractility and coexisting diseases (angina 
pectoris, bronchial asthma, peripheral vascular diseases). 
 
Detail description of these agents is represented in chapter 17. 
 
MAGNESIUM SALTS 
 
MAGNESIUM SULFATE 
 
 
is administered IV, IM (after the oral administration acts as laxative) 
 
 
is an antagonist of calcium ions in cells 
 
 
a sedative, hypnotic and narcosis action, the inhibition of the vasomotor 
center; an anti-seizure action, the dilatation of blood vessels, and a 
decrease in BP; an anti-arrhythmic action, the dehydratation of tissues, a 
diuretic ac-tion, a decrease in intracranial pressure; a spasmolytic action; 
an antidote in acute poisonings with compounds of calcium 
 
 
is used in hypertensive emergency, chronic hypertension, seizures attack, 
edema of the brain, tachyarrhythmia, myocardial infarction, toxicosis of 
pregnancy, overdose of calcium preparations 

Chapter 19.  ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS. HYPERTENSIVE AGENTS 
247
 
 
may cause side-effects, such as pain and infiltrate in the site of administration 
(IM), suppression of respiration (IV). If the suppression of respiration is oc-
curred, calcium chloride (IV) and carbogenum (inhalation) should be used. 
 
PHOSPHODIESTERASE INHIBITORS 
 
BENDAZOLE (DIBAZOLUM) 
 
 
a synthetic preparation, an imidazole derivative 
 
 
is administered IM, IV, orally; acts during 4-6 hrs 
 
 
inhibits PDE ΙΙΙ and increases the amount of cAMP in cells, that’s why 
produces the relaxation of smooth muscles and dilation of blood vessels 
 
has antihypertensive and spasmolytic actions; stimulates functions of the 
spinal cord; is an interferon inductor 
 
is indicated in hypertensive emergency, mild hypertension, spasms of blood 
vessels, spasms of smooth muscles in the gut, colic, neurological diseases 
with lesions of the spinal cord, non-specific prophylaxis of viral infections. 
 
 
is combined with papaverine to elevate antihypertensive activity. 
 
POTASSIUM CHANNEL OPENERS 
 
APPRESSIN (HYDRALAZIN) 
 
 
is administered orally, IM, IV; begins to act slowly (even after IV ad-
ministration); is well absorbed in the GI tract; is metabolized in the liver 
by acetylation; the speed of acetylation in one patient differs from that in 
another (rapid and slow acetylation); is excreted with urine and feces; 
acts during 4-12 hrs 
 
activates K+  channels, causes hyperpolarization and the blockage of 
 
Ca++channels, relaxes arteriolar smooth muscles and dilates arteriolar ves-
sels; as a result, decreases peripheral vascular resistance and decreases BP 
 
 
displays an antihypertensive action, increases the heart rate and car-diac 
output (resulting from reflexes, as well as from a direct action on β-
adrenoceptors in the heart); elevates pressure in the lung artery; increases 
renin secretion 
 
is used to treat moderate and severe hypertension, CHF 
 
 
is combined with β-adrenoblockers and diuretics 

248 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 19.2. Renin-angiotensin system and mechanism of action of ACE inhibitors and 
angiotensin II-receptor inhibitors (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
 
causes side-effects, such as weakness, headache, tachycardia, worsen in 
angina, flushing of skin, sweating, reversible lupus-like syndrome, reten-
tion of water and salts. 
 
DIAZOXIDE 
 
 
is administered orally, IV; begins to act in 2-5 min after IV administration; 
has the duration of action from 2-4 hrs (IV) to 12 hrs (orally) 
 
is K+ channel opener, arteriolar vasodilator 

Chapter 19.  ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS. HYPERTENSIVE AGENTS 
249
 
 
produces a decrease in BP; a reflexive increase in the heart rate; a 
decrease in tone of smooth muscles in the gut and uterus; inhibition of 
insulin secre-tion, a decrease in renal filtration and ureic acid excretion 
 
 
is used to treat hypertensive emergency and chronic hypertension 
 
 
may cause tachycardia, worsening in angina pectoris and diabetes, urico-
semia, constipation. 
 
MINOXIDIL 
 
 
is the K+ channel opener, arteriolar vasodilator 
 
 
is more potent than hydralazin 
 
 
is used for severe hypertension, renal failure, alopecia (as ointment) 
 
 
may cause hyrsutism as a side-effect. 
 
OTHER VASODILATORS 
 
SODIUM NITROPRUSSIDE 
 
 
is administered by IV infusion; begins to act within 1 min; stops to act in 
5 min after the end of IV infusion 
 
 
contains group NO binding the Fe, that’s why the mechanism of action is 
the same as the mechanism of nitroglycerine; exceeds nitroglycerine’s 
potency in 1000 times; is a arteriolar and venous vasodilator 
 
 
decreases BP; decreases the load on the myocardium; increases cardiac 
output under the conditions of heart failure; increases the secretion of renin 
 
is used in hypertensive emergency, acute heart failure, edema of the 
lungs, controlled hypotension in surgeries 
 
 
may cause hypotension, nausea, headache, sweating, restlessness, retros-
ternal pain. 
 
 
DRUGS ACTING 
 
ON RENIN-ANGIOTENSIN SYSTEM 
 
ACE INHIBITORS 

250 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
ACE inhibitors block ACE and disturb the transformation of angiotensin I 
into angiotensin II. 
 
The result is a decrease of output of the sympathetic nervous system, 
vasodila-tion, a decrease in sodium and water retention, enhance in the bradykinin 
level in blood (fig. 19.2). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
vasodilation caused by diminishing of angiotensin ΙΙ contens and an 
increase in the bradykinin level in blood 
 
 
a decrease in the blood volume resulting from the inhibition of the secretion 
of aldosterone and reducing of its action on sodium and water excretion 
 
a decrease in BP resulting from the vasodilatation and a decrease of 
blood volume 
 
 
a decrease in the load on the myocardium 
 
 
an increase in cardiac output under the conditions of heart failure 
 
 
a decrease in oxygen demand of the myocardium 
 
 
the reduction of pressure in blood vessels of the lungs 
 
 
the retention of potassium in the organism. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Hypertension 
 
 
Chronic CHF 
 
 
Myocardial infarction. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Dry cough, spasm of bronchi (resulting from an increase in the 
bradykinin level) 
 
Skin rash 
 
 
Fever 
 
 
Hypotension 
 
 
Hyperkalemia 
 
 
Disturbance in the renal function 
 
 
Altered taste (dysgeusia). 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Captopril is taken orally; reaches peak blood level in 60 min; has the duration 
of action of 6-8 hrs; is eliminated from the body within 24 hrs; the initial dose can 
be increased in 1- to 2-week intervals. 
 
Enalapril is more potent than captopril; has the duration of action which is 
twice as long as that of captopril; is taken orally once or twice a day. 

Chapter 19.  ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS. HYPERTENSIVE AGENTS 
251
 
Lisinopril is the active metabolite of enalapril; is absorbed slowly and has a 
slow onset of action; is taken orally once a day. 
 
Fosinopril is administered as a prodrug and is converted in vivo to the active 
form fosinoprilat; unlike other ACE inhibitors that are primarily excreted by the 
kidneys, is eliminated from the body by both renal and hepatic pathways, thus it 
may be used in patient with renal failure; has the highest lipophilicity and the best 
penetration into tissues, so it reliably and for a long time controls BP level during 
the day and exerts a pronounced organoprotective effect. 
 
ANTAGONISTS OF ANGIOTENSIN RECEPTORS 
 
LOSARTAN 
 
 
is taken orally and acts during 6-8 hrs 
 
 
blocks angiotensin ΙΙ receptors, dilates blood vessels, decreases BP and 
load on the myocardium 
 
is used for the monotherapy of hypertension and CHF 
 
 
has less side-effects than ACE inhibitors, does not cause dry cough and a 
spasm of bronchi. 
 
Telmisartan also is an antagonist of AT1-angiotensin receptors, is slightly 
more effective than losartan in lowering BP. has better bioavailability and 
prevalence of hepatic clearance as compared to losartan; displays the longest half-
life (24 hrs) between other sartans. 
 
RENIN INHIBITORS 
 
ALISKIREN 
 
 
is the first member of the new class of orally active direct renin inhibitors 
 
 
by inhibiting renin, it blocks the conversion of angiotensinogen to angio-
tensin I, which results in a reduction in angiotensin II concentrations; sup-
presses the effects of renin and leads to reduction in plasma renin activity 
 
 
can be used either as monotherapy or in combination with other antihyper-
tensive agents; combination therapy with angiotensin receptor blockers may 
provide additional BP-lowering effects compared with the monotherapy 
 
 
is well tolerated; side effects are fatigue, headache, dizziness, diarrhea, 
nasopharyngitis, and back pain. 
 
DIURETICS 
 
All the oral diuretics are effective in the treatment of hypertension, but thiazides 
(hydrochlorothiazide, = dichlothiazide) have found the widest use. They act on the 

252 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
cell basal membrane in proximal tubules and decrease the reabsorption of sodium 
and chlorides. As a result, they increase sodium, chlorides, potassium and water 
excretion with urine, decrease the volume of blood and edema of blood vessel wall 
that leads to a decrease in peripheral resistance and lowering of BP. 
Furosemide is a loop diuretic which is used parenterally in hypertensive 
emer-gency. 
 
Potassium-sparring diuretics may also be used to treat hypertension. They 
act in distal tubules, increase excretion of sodium and water, cause the retention of 
potassium in the body. 
 
DRUGS FOR HYPERTENSION EMERGENCY 
 
For parenteral administration: 
 
–  sodium nitroprusside (by IV infusion in severe hypertensive crisis) 
 
–  labetalol 
 
–  Pentamine 
 
–  furosemide 
 
–  magnesium sulfate 
 
–  bendazole and papaverine 
 
–  diazoxide 
 
For sublingual administration: 
 
–  clonidine 
 
–  nifedipine 
 
–  captopril. 
 
HYPERTENSIVE DRUGS 
 
To treat acute hypotension (collapse, shock) it is used α-adrenomimetics (no-
radrenaline, phenylephrine), α, β-adrenomimetics (adrenaline, ephedrine), 
analeptics (camphor, nikethamide). 
 
To treat chronic hypotension it is used phenylephrine (in the form of tablets), 
analeptics (caffeine), adaptogens. 
All the listed preparations are described in detail in chapters 7, 14, 15. 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. In hypertensive emergency the drugs of the first choice are: 
 
 
Clonidine + furosemide 
 
 
Metyldopa + dichlothiazide 

Chapter 19.  ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS. HYPERTENSIVE AGENTS 
253
 
 
Reserpine + dichlothiazide 
 
 
Guanetidine + dichlothiazide 
 
 
Strophanthin + furosemide. 
 
№2. Only one of following drugs is a potent vasodilator realizing its effects 
through the –NO group: 
 
 
Papaverine 
 
 
Drotaverine (No-spa) 
 
 
Sodium nitropusside 
 
 
Prazosin 
 
 
Captopril. 
 
№3. An antihypertensive action of β-adrenoblockers is due to: 
 
 
A decrease of cardiac output 
 
 
The inhibition of the conductivity in the heart 
 
 
A decrease of the oxygen demand in the myocardium 
 
 
A decrease of the renin synthesis in the kidney 
 
 
A decrease of intraocular pressure. 
 
№4. The correct statements concerning antihypertensive drugs are: 
 
 
Clonidine is the inhibitor of the vasomotor center activity 
 
 
Diazoxide is K+-channel opener, arteriolar vasodilator 
 
 
Guanethidine is sympatholytic for hypertensive emergency 
 
 
Lisinopril is the active metabolite of enalapril 
 
 
Diuretics are not combined with other antihypertensive drugs. 
 
№5. Hypertensive patient was treated with the drug that decreases the 
vascular tone. His treatment was complicated by persistent dry cough. Which drug 
was most probably used? 
 
 
Papaverine 
 
 
Phentolamine 
 
 
Captopril 
 
 
Prazosin 
 
 
Clonidine (Clophelinum). 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – A; № 2 – C; № 3 – A, D; № 4 – A, B, D; № 5 – C. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 ANTI-ATHEROSCLEROTIC 
DRUGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ATHEROSCLEROSIS 
 
Atheroscleosis is a chronic disease of arteries which results in the forming of 
an atheromatous plaque. An atheromatous plaque develops in such stages as the 
infil-tration of the blood vessel wall by cholesterol, local forming of fibrin, 
development of connective tissue and its calcinosis (fig. 20.1). An atheromathous 
plaque causes disturbances in blood flow complicated by myocardial infarction, 
ischemic insult, aneurism of the aorta, and gangrene of extremities. 
 
Main links of pathogenesis 
 
There are four main links in the development of atherosclerosis: 
 
 
hyperlipoproteinemia 
 
 
an increase in free-radical lipid peroxidation 
 
 
hypercoagulation of blood 
 
 
lesions of endothelium. 
 
Hyperlipoprotienemia 
 
The main classes of lipoproteins are: 
 
––  chylomicrones (Chy) 
 
––  low-density lipoproteins (LDL) 

Chapter 20.  ANTI-ATHEROSCLEROTIC DRUGS 
255
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Normal 
 
Artery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mild 
 
Atherosclerosos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Severe 
 
Atherosclerosis 
 
Fig. 20.1. Atheromathous plaque in blood vessel (http://www.picsearch.com). 
 
–– very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) 
 
–– high-density lipoproteins (HDL). 
 
Chy, LDL, VLDL are atherogenic lipoproteins. HDL are anti-atherogenic lipo-
proteins. According to laboratory findingds, there are 5 types of hyperlipoproteinemia. 
Hyperlipoproteinemia of type ΙΙ–ΙV leads to the development of atherosclerosis. 
 
Lipids peroxidation 
 
Lipids peroxidation is non-enzymic oxidation initiated by free radicals of oxygen. 
It destroys cell membranes and leads to the forming of lipids peroxides. An increase in 
lipids peroxidation and the inhibition of antioxidant protection results in the injuries of 
the blood vessels wall. Oxidized lipids are taken by macrophages which are 
transformed into foam cells (components of an atheromathous plaque). 
 
Hypercoagulation of blood 
 
An increase in platelet aggregation and adhesion leads to an increase in blood 
coagulation and to the sedimentation of fibrin on the site of injured inthima of 
arteries that is a prediction of an atheromatous plaque. 
Endothelium lesions 
 
Normal endothelium has no gaps through which atherogenous lipoproteins 
and cholesterol can enter the blood vessels wall. The contraction of endothelial 
cells caused by bradykinin leads to the forming of such gaps and opens the way to 
cholesterol infiltration of the wall of arteries. 

256 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Principles of pharmacotherapy of atherosclerosis 
 
There are the following basic principles of pharmacotherapy of atherosclerosis: 
 
 
An early beginning of treatment 
 
 
A long-durative treatment 
 
 
Courses of treatment in the periods of worsening of disease caused by the 
season deficit of antioxidants, stress, etc. 
 
The choice of preparations according to a leading clinic-laboratory syndrome 
 
 
The oral administration of drugs and their minimal toxicity under the 
condi-tions of long-lasting therapy 
 
The laboratory control of the effectiveness of treatment. 
 
ANTI-ATHEROSCLEROTIC DRUGS 
 
Anti-atherosclerotic drugs are drugs for the treatment of atherosclerosis. 
They protect arteries from atherosclerosis and are angioprotectors (fig. 20.2). 
 
 
ANTI-ATHEROSCLEROTIC 
 
DRUGS 
 
Antihyperlipoproteinemic drugs 
 
( hyperlipoproteinemia) 
 
Antioxidants 
 
( lipids peroxidation) 
 
Anti-platelet drugs 
 
( platelet aggregation) 
 
Endothelium-tropic drugs 
 
( permeability of endothelium) 
 
Fig. 20.2. Main groups of anti-atherosclerotic drugs. 
 
 
ANTIHYPERLIPOPROTEINEMIC DRUGS 
 
Antihyperlipoproteinemic drugs are preparations for a decrease of blood 
sesum level of atherogenous lipoproteins and cholesterol. 

Chapter 20.  ANTI-ATHEROSCLEROTIC DRUGS 
257
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 Drugs interfering with intestinal absorption of cholesterol 
 
–  Cholestiramine 
 
– Ezetimibe 
 
 Inhibitors of de novo cholesterol synthesis 
 
– Fenofibrate 
 
– Lovastatin 
 
– Simvastatin 
 
– Atorvastatin 
 
– Nicotinic acid (niacin) 
 
 Drugs increasing cholesterol catabolism 
 
– Essentuale 
 
– Lipostabil 
 
CHOLESTYRAMINE 
 
 
is a synthetic preparation (resin) 
 
 
is taken orally in a day dose of 10,0-20,0 
 
 
is a bile acid sequestrant: binds to bile acids in the intestine, forms insoluble 
compounds which are excreted with feces. A loss of bile acids leads to an 
increase in the conversion of cholesterol into bile acids in the liver and a 
compensatory increase in hepatic LDL receptors. That results in enhanced 
capture of LDL and cholesterol from blood serum and reduction in serum 
 
LDL and the cholesterol level (fig. 20.4) 
 
 
is indicated in atherosclerosis with hyperlipoproteinemia of ΙΙ-ΙV types, 
cholestasis, and elevated plasma bile acids 

258 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
Cholesterol 
 
Bile acids 
Bile 
and salts 
 
salts 
 
Insoluble 
complex 
 
 
Feces 
 
Cholestyramine, colestipol, or 
colesevelam form an insoluble 
complex with the bile acids and 
salts, preventing their reabsorption 
from the intestine. 
 
Fig. 20.3. Mechanism of cholestiramine’s action (by R. Finkel et al., 2008). 
 
 
causes side-effects, such as dyspepsia, constipation, a decrease in the ab-
sorption of fat-soluble vitamins and other drugs. 
 
EZETIMIBE 
 
 
is cholesterol-loering agent taking oraly once a day 
 
 
blocks specific cholesterol transporter in the GI epithelial cells 
(Niemann-Pick C1-Like1 protein) 
 
acts by decreasing cholesterol absorption in the small intestine, is 
selective inhibitor of cholesterol absorbtion 
 
is used alone, when other hypolipidemic medications are not tolerated, or 
together with statins when thet alone do not control cholesterol. 
 
may cause headache, diarrhea, myalgia, hyperfermentemia, 
hypersensitivity reactions and myopathy. 
 
LOVASTATIN 
 
 
belongs to statins; is a structural analog of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl 
coenzyme A (HMG CoA) (metabolite in cholesterol biosynthesis), 
natural compound from Aspergillus terreus 

Chapter 20.  ANTI-ATHEROSCLEROTIC DRUGS 
259
 
 
is taken orally once a day (in the evening); is a pro-drug (transforms into 
the active form in the blood) 
 
inhibits HMG CoA reductase and blocks the hepatic synthesis of cholesterol 
on the stage of the mevalonic acid, increases the expression of hepatic LDL 
receptors and activates receptor-mediated clearance of LDL (fig. 20.4) 
 
 
decreases serum levels of LDL, LDL-cholesterol, VLDL-cholesterol; el-
evates serum level of HDL-cholesterol 
 
is used to treat atherosclerosis with hyperlipoproteinemia of ΙΙa-ΙΙb type, 
atherosclerosis at a high risk of myocardial infarction; secondary 
hyperlipi-demia resulting from diabetes mellitus or a nephrotic syndrome 
 
may cause an increase in serum level of hepatic transaminases, 
dyspepsia, diarrhea, myopathy, renal failure. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER STATINS 
 
Simvastatin is semisynthetic preparation, has pharmacokinetics similar to lo-
vastatin’s one, can be prescribed at a normal or moderately elevated baseline level 
of common cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol; is stronger than lovastatin, but less 
potent than atorvastatin and rosuvastatin. but greater than atorvastatin, increases 
HDL-cholesterol. 
Atorvastatin is synthetic preparation; has a greater bioavailability and half-
life than lovastatin; is stronger than simvastatin and lovastatin; has more potent 
effect than simvastatin in reducing of common cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol and 
triglycerides, may be given to wider range of patients, especially with acute 
coronary syndrome and diabetes mellitus. 
Rosuvastatin is synthetic drug; is not metabolized by the P450 system and does 
not form active metabolites; has the greatest bioavailability and half-life between other 
statins; is distinguished by rapid onset of effect (after 1 week of treatment) and the 
most pronounced action on LDL-cholesterol, and HDL-cholesterol. 
 
FENOFIBRATE 
 
 
is a fibric acid derivative 
 
is taken orally 2-3 times daily 
 
has a complex mechanism of action: 1) is an agonist of the nuclear tran-
scription regulator of the genes coding enzymes of lipid metabolism; 2) is 
a stimulator of peroxysome proliferator-activated receptor-α (PPAR-α); 
3) is an activator of lipoprotein lipase and increases the hydrolysis of 
triglyc-erides; 4) is an inhibitor of hepatic synthesis of VLDL 
 
reduces the serum level of Chy, VLDL, and triglycerides, lowers VLDL-
cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol and increases HDL-cholesterol (less than 

260 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 20.4. The influence of statins on cholesterol synthesis (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
triglycerides); also reduces plasma fibrinogen; activates fibrinolysis; 
inhibits inflammation in the vascular wall 
 
is indicated in atherosclerosis with the hyperlipoproteinemia of ΙΙΙ or V type 
 
 
may cause dyspepsia, myositis, myopathy, cholelithiasis, cholecystitis, 
arrhythmia. 
 
NICOTINIC ACID (NIACINUM) 

Chapter 20.  ANTI-ATHEROSCLEROTIC DRUGS 
261
 
 
is a water-soluble vitamin, but an anti-atherosclerotic action is not due to 
vitamin activity 
 
is taken orally in higher doses (3,0 per day) 
 
 
inhibits lipolysis in fat tissue and hepatic triglyceride esterification; 
promotes the activity of lipoprotein lipase 
 
reduces VLDL and triglycerides levels; elevates the level of HDL; inhibits 
platelet aggregation, increases fibrinolysis, and dilates blood vessels 
 
 
is used in atherosclerosis with hyperlipidemia, especially of V type 
 
 
may cause a flush-syndrome, peptic ulcer of the stomach, hepatic lesions, 
glucose intolerance, hyperuricemia. 
 
ESSENTIALE 
 
 
contains essential phospholipids, which regulate the metabolism of 
lipopro-teins, transferring neutral lipids and cholesterol to oxidation sites, 
mainly by increasing the ability of HDL to bind to cholesterol. 
 
 
has normalizing effect on the metabolism of lipids and proteins; on the 
detoxification function of the liver; on the restoration and stabilization of 
the liver cellular structure, reduces the lithogenic index and stabilizes bile 
 
 
is used in atherosclerosis (orally) and more often in chronic hepatitis; cir-
rhosis of the liver, toxic liver lesions (by IV infusion and orally) 
 
side effects are minimal (GI disturbances, diarrhea). 
 
• 
 
LINAETHOLUM 
 
 
is a plant preparation from oil of flax semen 
 
 
contains unsaturated fatty acids 
 
 
is taken orally (1 table-spoon per day) 
 
 
increases binding of cholesterol to HDL; promotes the transformation of 
cholesterol into its esters and their transport to the liver; stimulates trans-
formation of cholesterol into bile acids and reduces the serum level of 
LDL and LDL-cholesterol 
 
is used for the treatment of atherosclerosis with hyperlipoproteinemia of 
 
ΙΙ-ΙV types 
 
 
may cause dyspepsia, an increase in lipids peroxidation (tocopherol 
acetate should be given together with Linaetholum). 
 
LIPOSTABIL 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
is a combined preparation containing essential phospholipids, vitamins, 
AMP, and hydroxyethyltheophylline 
 
is taken orally, may be administered IV under the conditions of hepatic 
diseases or fat embolism 
 
has the mechanism of action similar to the mechanism of Linaetholum, 
but acts stronger, protects hepatic cells, can dissolve fat emboli 
 
is used in atherosclerosis with hyperlipoproteinemia, liver diseases, fat 
embolism. 
  
ANTIOXIDANTS 
 
Antioxydants are natural or synthetic substances which inhibit free-radical 
lipids peroxidation. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lipid peroxidation 
 
LDL 
 
 
 
Oxidized LDL 
 
 
 
 
 
ANTIOXIDANTS 
 
 
 
 
 
Macrophages consume 
 
oxidized lipoproteins, 
 
becoming foam ceiis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Macrophage 
      Foam cell 
 
Foam cells accumulate 
 
and release growth factors 
 
that stimulate formation of 
 
atherosclerotic plague 
 
 
 
Fig. 20.5. Mechanism of antioxidants action in atherosclerosis. 

Chapter 20.  ANTI-ATHEROSCLEROTIC DRUGS 
263
 
 Direct-acting antioxidants 
 
–  Tocopherol acetate 
 
–  Ascorbic acid 
 
–  Rutin 
 
–  Probucol 
 
 Indirect-acting antioxidants 
 
–  Glutaminic acid 
 
–  Methionine 
 
–  Cysteine. 
 
Mechanism of antihyperlipoproteinemic action 
 
Direct- acting antioxidants inhibit oxidation of cholesterol resulting in the 
ingestion of the oxidized cholesterol laden LDL by macrophages. That’s why they 
inhibit the conversion of macrophages into foam cells which are the basis for 
plaque formation (fig. 20.5). 
 
Indirect-acting antioxidants do not interact with free radicals and peroxides. 
They are needed for the synthesis of glutathion (natural direct antioxidant which 
supports the activity of the ascorbic acid and takes part in detoxication processes 
in the liver). In this process, the glutaminic acid takes out the carbon chain, 
methyonine is a donator of methyl group, cysteine is a donator of the SH-group. 
 
Indications 
 
Antioxidants are used for the treatment of atherosclerosis accompanied by 
enhanced lipids peroxidation. Their effectiveness is increased if antioxidant 
prepara-tions are used in a combination. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Tocopherol acetate is a fat-soluble vitamin; is taken orally to treat athero-
sclerosis; is the most active low-weight antioxidant in the organism; is located in 
membrane lipids; neutralizes all kinds of free radicals and peroxides; decreases 
LDL-cholesterol, inhibits the destruction of elastic fibers in the vascular wall and 
forming of atheromathous plaque; decreases platelet aggregation. 
 
Ascorbic acid is a water-soluble vitamin; is taken orally for the treatment of 
atherosclerosis; is an active low-weight antioxidant which acts in the hydrophylic 
phase of membranes; it neutralizes free radicals and peroxides, as well as supports 
the activity of tocopherol; takes part in cholesterol synthesis in the liver; inhibits 
the destruction of vascular wall and forming of atheromathous plaque, normalizes 
contents of lipoproteins and cholesterol in blood serum. 
 
Detail description of antioxidants is represented in chapter 27. 

264
PHARMACOLOGY. V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
BRADYKININ 
BRADYKININ 
PARMIDIN 
Constriction of 
No constriction of 
endothelial cells 
endothelial cells 
Gaps betwen 
No gaps betwen 
endothelial cells 
endothelial cells 
Lipid infiltration 
No lipid infiltration 
A 
LDL- 
B 
LDL- 
cholesterol 
cholesterol 
 
 
Fig. 20.6. Mechanism of parmidin’s action: 
 
A – without parmidin; B – under the influence of parmidin. 
 
ANTI-PLATELET DRUGS 
 
Aspirin and low doses of heparin (IM or by inhalation) are used for the treat-
ment of atherosclerosis accompanied by hypercoagulation of blood. 
Pharmacological properties of anti-platelets are described in detail in chapter 22. 
 
 
ENDOTHELIUM-TROPIC DRUGS 
 
PARMIDIN (PRODECTIN) 
 
 
is taken orally 2-3 times daily 
 
 
is an antagonist of bradykinin. It decreases the influence of bradykinin on 
endothelial cells and in such a way decreases contractions of endothelial 
cells. The absence of gaps between endothelial cells makes impossible 
the transport of LDL-cholesterol into the vascular wall and decreases the 
infiltration of blood vessels wall by cholesterol (fig. 20.6) 

Chapter 20.  ANTI-ATHEROSCLEROTIC DRUGS 
265
 
 
decreases the permeability of the blood vessels wall, stimulates endothelium 
regeneration, inhibits inflammation, has an anti-platelet action 
 
 
is used to treat atherosclerosis (especially of peripheral vessels or with-
out any significant changes in laboratory analyses), diabetic angiopathy, 
thrombosis of veins in the retina, endarteritis obliterans, trophic ulcer of 
the lower extremities 
 
 
may cause headache, dyspepsia, skin rash. 
 
• 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Cholestyramine lowers the level of cholesterol by: 
 
 
Sequestering bile acids in the intestine 
 
 
The prevention of bile acids reabsorption 
 
 
An increase of VLDL excretion 
 
 
The inhibition of lipids peroxidation 
 
 
The activation of lipoprotein lipase. 
 
№2. The following statements concerning antioxidants are correct, except: 
 
 
They inhibit free-radical lipids peroxidation 
 
 
They inhibit the oxidation of cholesterol and its uptake by macrophages 
 
 
They slow the development of atherosclerosis 
 
 
They inhibit the synthesis of cholesterol at the stage of the mevalonic acid 
 
 
Direct acting antioxidants are natural and synthetic substances. 
 
№3. The drugs inhibiting de novo cholesterol synthesis are: 
 
 
Lovastatin 
 
 
Parmidin 
 
 
Fenofibrate 
 
 
Polysponinum 
 
 
Tocopherol acetate. 
 
№4. Fibrates decrease the lipoprotein level in blood serum by: 
 
 
The activation of lipoprotein lipase 
 
 
Lowering of circulating triglycerids 
 
 
The prevention of cholesterol absorption from the gut 
 
 
The alteration of LDL composition 
 
 
All the above listed. 

266 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
№5. A 60-year old patient visited her doctor for routine examination. Blood 
sampling revealed an elevated level of VLDL and triglycerides in blood 
plasma. Due to this anti-atherosclerotic drug was prescribed. This drug 
belongs to vitamin preparations and in higher dose enhances lipoprotein 
lipase synthesis and decreases the level of triglycerides in blood. It also 
dilates blood vessels and increases fibrinolysis. What drug was prescribed? 
 
 
Nicotinic acid 
 
 
Ascorbic acid 
 
 
Lovastatin 
 
 
Fenofibrate 
 
 
Cholestyramine. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – A; № 2 – D; № 3 – A, C; № 4 – A, B, D; № 5 – A. 

Chapter 20.  ANTI-ATHEROSCLEROTIC DRUGS 
267
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 DRUGS ACTING ON 
HEMOPOIESIS (HEMATINICS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HEMOPOIESIS 
 
Hemopoiesis is the production of blood cells from undifferentiated stem cells. 
 
It is located in the bone marrow and divided into erythropoiesis and leukopoiesis. 
 
Erythropoiesis is the production of erythrocytes in the bone marrow. The de-
velopment of erythrocytes is accompanied by the reduction of nuclei and 
saturation by hemoblobin. 
 
Pathology of erythropoiesis displays as anemia or polycytemia. 
 
Anemia is blood disorder characterized by a reduction of erythrocytes count, 
hemoglobin, and hematocrit, although not all three findings may be present. 
Types of anemia: 
 
 
hypochromic iron-deficiency anemia (fig. 21.1) 
 
 
hyperchromic megaloblastic anemia (fig. 21.1) 
 
 
hemolytic anemia 
 
 
aplastic anemia. 

Polycytemia is a disease with highly increased red blood cells mass and 
hemo-globin concentration caused by the pathological proliferation of erythroid 
cells in the bone marrow. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 21.1. Pathology of erythropoiesis (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Leukopoiesis is the production of lymphocytes and granulocytes. Pathology 
of leukopoiesis is manifested as leukopenia or leukemia. Leukopenia is a 
decrease in the amount of leukocytes in blood resulting from 
 
the inhibition of their forming in the bone marrow. 
 
Leukemia (leukosis) is cancer of blood characterized by malignant prolifera-
tion of white blood cells precursors in the bone marrow resulting in the increase of 
the leukocytes amount. 
 
DRUGS ACTING ON HEMOPOIESIS 
 
Drugs acting on hemopoiesis (hematinics) are divided into agents acting on 
erythropoiesis and agents acting on leukopoiesis. Stimulants and inhibitors are 
rep-resented in each group. 
 
DRUGS ACTING ON ERYTHROPOIESIS 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Erythropoiesis stimulants 

Chapter 21.  DRUGS ACTING ON HEMOPOIESIS (HEMATINICS) 
269
 
1. Drugs used in hypochromic iron-deficiency anemia 
 
 
iron preparations 
 
– Ferrous sulfate 
 
– Tardyferon 
 
–  Ferrum-lek 
 
 
cobalt preparations 
 
–  Coamid 
 
 
combined preparations 
 
–  Ferovenum 
 
–  Ferroplex 
 
–  Hemostimulinum 
 
 
adjuvant hematinics 
 
–  Erythropoetin (Epoetin α) 
 
–  Recormon (Epoetin β) 
 
 
Drugs used in hyperchromic megaloblastic anemia 
 
–  Cyanocobalamin 
 
–  Folic acid 
 
–  Sodium phosphate containing P32 
 
–  Imiphos. 
 
DRUGS USED IN HYPOCHROMIC 
 
IRON-DEFICIENCY ANEMIA 
 
FERROUS SULFATE 
 
The drug contains Fe++. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally 
 
 
is transformed into the ionic form with the participation of HCL in the 
stomach; is absorbed in the intestine (Fe++ binds to apoferritin and in the 
form of ferritin crosses intestinal epithelium) (fig. 21.2) 
 
absorption in the GI tract is 10-20% of a dose and increases under the 
conditions of anemia 
 
Fe++ absorption is stimulated by vitamin C and glucose and inhibited by 
calcium, antacids, tetracycline, chloramphenicol 
 
Fe++ binds to transferrin in blood serum and is transported in this complex 
 
 
concentrates in the bone marrow and depo tissues (liver, spleen) 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
is excreted with urine, feces, epithelial cells, and menstrual blood in women. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
is used to form hemoglobin in erythrocytes 
 
 
is used to form myoglobin in muscles 
 
 
is used to form enzymes (cytochrome oxidase and others). 
 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
an increase in the amount of red blood cells 
 
 
an increase in the saturation of erythrocytes by hemoglobin 
 
 
the reduction of symptoms of anemia (weakness, paleness, tachycardia, 
etc.) which begins in 5-7 days after the start of treatment. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Hypochromic anemia of various ethiology (anemia from an acute and 
chronic blood loss, alimentary iron deficiency, pregnancy, etc.). 
 
Depot-preparation of ferrous sulfate (dragee or coated tablets) is used 
under the name Tardyferon. 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Dyspepsia 
1. Hemolytic anemia 
2. Constipation (resulting from binding of iron 
2. Hemosiderosis, hemo- 
3.
with H2S in the intestine and bowels) 
chromatosis 
Teeth darkness (resulting from the binding of 
iron to H2S in the oral cavity and forming of 
black compound FeS) 
4. Black color of feces imitating intestinal 
bleeding 
5. Hemosiderosis 
6. Allergy. 
 
Acute poisoning with ferrous compounds 
 
Signs: 
 
–– The irritation and necrosis of the gastric mucosa 
 
–– Lesions of the liver and brain 
 
–– Collapse, coma. 
 
Emergency help: 
 
–– The lavage of the stomach with 1% solution of sodium bicarbonate 

Chapter 21.  DRUGS ACTING ON HEMOPOIESIS (HEMATINICS) 
271
 
 
 
 
 
Oral 
intake 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Absorption 
Duoclenum 
upper jejunum 
 
 
 
Transport 
 
plasma 
 
 
 
 
Uptake into 
erythroblast 
bone marrow 
 
 
 
 
 
Erythrocyte 
 
blood 
 
 
Loss through 
 
blading 
 
 
Fe III-Salts 
 
Fe II-Salts 
 
 
Heme-Fe 
 
 
 
 
 
Fe III 
 
Ferritin 
 
 
 
Fe III 
Fe III 
 
Transferrin 
 
 
 
Hemoglobin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parenteral 
administration 
 
 
i.v. 
i.m. 
 
 
Fe III-complexes 
 
 
 
 
Fe III 
 
Ferritin 
 
Hemosiderin 
= aggregated 
ferritin 
 
Uptake into macrophages 
spleen. liver, bone marrow 
 
Fig. 21.2. Pharmacokinetics of iron (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 

272 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
–– Albumin solution (orally) 
 
–– Desferal (Desferrioxamine) (IV and into the stomach) as an antidote. The 
drug acts by binding free iron in the bloodstream and enhancing its elimina-
tion in the urine. By removing excess iron, the agent reduces the damage of 
organs and tissues. Desferal also is used to treat hemochromatosis, a disease 
of iron accumulation. Acquired hemochromatosis is common in patients with 
certain types of chronic anemia (e.g. thalassemia and myelodysplastic 
syndrome) who require many blood transfusions 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Ferrum-lek is a compound of iron with maltose or saccharose; is made in 
two forms: the 1st form – for IM administration (maltose-containing); the 2nd one – 
for IV administration (saccharose-containing); is used for anemia resulting from 
iron malabsorption or for severe anemia; may cause nausea, vomiting, allergic 
reactions, hypotension (rarely). 
 
Coamid contains cobalt; is administered IM, IV; accumulates the bone mar-
row; increases the synthesis of erythropoietin, promotes the including of iron into 
hemoglobin; is the additional remedy in the treatment of hypochromic anemia, is 
used together with iron preparations. 
 
Fercovenum is a combined preparation containing ferrous saccharate, cobalt 
gluconate, and carbonhydrates; is administered only IV in a dose which is calculated 
according to color index and the patient’s body weight; is used for severe hypochromic 
anemia (hemoglobin level may be restored during the 1st day of the treatment) and for 
anemia on the ground of iron malabsorption; may cause side-effects, such as face 
hyperemia, retrosternal pain, hypotension, a shock-like reaction. 
 
Ferroplex is a combined preparation in the form of dragee which contains 
fer-rous sulfate and vitamin C. 
 
Hemostimulinum is in the form of tablets; contains ferrous lactate and 
copper sulfate; stimulates erythropoiesis, as well as the synthesis of oxido-
reductases needed for normal function of CNS. 
 
Epoetin β is glycoprotein, natural factor stimulating mitosis and proliferation of 
erythroid cells; is administered SC or IV; has half-elimination of 4-12 hrs after IV 
injection and 12-28 hrs after SC administration; is used for the treatment of hy-
pochromic anemia in patients with renal failure, for the prevention and treatment of 
anemia resulting from cancer chemotherapy, anemia accompaning myelomic disease, 
before autohemotransfusion, and for the prevention of anemia in premature newborns; 
may cause side-effects, such as hypertension, hypercoagulation of blood, 

Chapter 21.  DRUGS ACTING ON HEMOPOIESIS (HEMATINICS) 
273
 
skin rash, allergy; is contraindicated in hypersensitivity, hypertension, myocardial 
infarction, prone to thrombus formation. 
 
DRUGS USED IN HYPERCHROMIC 
 
MEGALOBLASTIC ANEMIA 
 
The folic acid and cyanocobalamin (vitamin B12) are necessary for the 
normal formation of red and white blood cells. The deficit of cyanocobalamin or 
the folic acid results from dietary factors, poor absorption, or therapy with folate 
antagonists (metotrexate, sulfa drugs, trimethoprim). It leads to the development 
of megalo-blastic anemia (also known as malignant, pernicious, Addison-
Birmer’s anemia). Megaloblastic anemia is characterized by the presence of 
megaloblasts in blood, hyperchromic condition, CNC disturbances, and glossitis. 
 
CYANOCOBALAMIN 
 
 
is a water-soluble vitamin 
 
 
is taken orally, is administered IM, IV; binds to an intrinsic Castle factor 
in the stomach and is absorbed in the intestine by endocytosis; 
concentrates in the liver 
 
 
is biotransformed to cobalamin, co-factor of the folic acid reductase 
(fig.21.3), takes part in the synthesis of purine and pyrimidine nucleotides 
and transforms megaloblastic hemopoiesis into normoblastic one, 
normal-izes the blood film (the amount and qualities of erythrocytes, 
leukocytes, and thrombocytes); 
 
 
takes part in the synthesis of myelin and acetylcholine, decreases 
neurologi-cal disturbances connected with megaloblastic anemia 
 
 
takes part in the function of the epithelium and decreases disturbances in 
tongue mucosa (Hunter’s glossitis) 
 
 
is indicated in hypercromic megaloblastic anemia, hypoplastic anemia, 
radiation sickness, neurological diseases, liver diseases, dystrophy in 
chil-dren, glossitis 
 
 
may cause allergy, hypercoagulation, tachycardia, pain in the heart, 
worsen in angina pectoris. 
 
 
is contraindicated to patients with hypersensitivity, thrombosis, throm-
boembolism. 
 
FOLIC ACID 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
is a water-soluble vitamin 
 
 
is taken orally; is absorbed in the small intestine and deposited in the liver 
 
(fig. 21.3) 
 
 
takes part in the synthesis of purine and pyrimidine nucleotides, amino 
acids and proteins 
 
 
is the additional remedy in the treatment of hyperchomic megaloblastic 
anemia; is used together with cyanocobalamin; is also indicated in 
chronic gastro-enteritis, sprue, in pregnancy for the prophylaxis of 
neurological pathology of the fetus and newborn. 
 
• 
 
 
 
 
DNA 
 
synthesis 
 
H3C Vit. B12 
 
 
H3C 
 
 
 
Storage 
supply for 
3 years 
 
 
 
 
 
i.m. 
 
 
 
Streptomyces 
griseus 
 
 
Folic acid H4 
Vit. B12 
Folic acid 
H3C   Folic acid H4 
Vit. B12 
Trans- 
HCl 
cobalamin II 
Vit. B12 
Intrinsic 
factor 
Pariental cell 
 
Fig. 21.3. Absorption and storage of folates and cyanocobalamin 
 
(by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 

Chapter 21.  DRUGS ACTING ON HEMOPOIESIS (HEMATINICS) 
275
 
 
ERHYTHROPOIESIS INHIBITORS 
 
Sodium phosphate with radioactive phosphor is administered IV in a special 
clinic; is absorbed by erythoblasts and kill them due to radiation, that’s why 
inhibits red blood cells forming, decreases the amount of erythrocytes and 
viscosity of blood, improves the condition of patient suffering from polycytemia. 
 
Imiphos is an anti-cancer drug; interacts with DNA and inhibits production 
of red blood cells in the bone marrow and in such a way improves the condition of 
the patient with polycytemia. 
 
DRUGS ACTING ON LEUKOPOIESIS 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Leukopoiesis stimulants 
 
 
Nucleic acid derivatives 
 
–  Sodium nucleinate 
 
 
Pyrimidine derivatives 
 
–  Methyluracil 
 
–  Pentoxilum 
 
 
Colony stimulating factors 
 
–  Filgrastim 
 
–  Molgrastim 
 
–  Lenograstim 
 
 Alkylating agents 
 
– Mechlorethamide (Embichin) 
 
– Cyclophosphamide 
 
– Dopan 
 
– Myelosan 
 
– Chlorbutin (Leukeran) 
 
– Sarcolysine 
 
 Antimetabolites 
 
– Methotrexate 
 
– Mercaptopurine 
 
– Phtoruracil 
 
 Anti-cancer antibiotics 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
– Actinomycin (Dactinomycin) 
 
– Rubomycin 
 
 Alkaloids 
 
– Vinblastine 
 
– Vincristine 
 
– Demecolcine (Colchamine) 
 
– Paclitaxel 
 
 Enzymes 
 
– L-asparaginase 
 
 Steroid hormones 
 
– Prednisolone 
 
– Gonadal hormones and their antagonists (Fosfestrol, Tamoxifen, etc). 
 
 Monoclonal antibodies 
 
– Rituxan (Rituximab) 
 
– Zevalin (Y90-Ibritumomab) 
 
– Mylotarg (Gemtuzumab) 
 
– Erbitux (Cetuximab). 
 
 
LEUKOPOIESIS STIMULANTS 
 
METHYLURACIL 
 
 
is a pyrimidine derivative 
 
 
is administered orally, rectally, or applied topically (as ointment); is well ab-
sorbed in the GI tract and completely metabolized in the body; acts during 4-6 hrs 
 
is the substrate for the synthesis of nucleic acids 
 
 
stimulates leukopoiesis and increases the amount of white blood cells; 
stimulates phagocytosis and immunity; improves tissues regeneration; ac-
celerates the development and ending of inflammation 
 
 
is indicated in leucopenia, wounds and bone fractures with poor 
regeneration, ulcers, burns, gastric ulcer, chronic inflammations with 
slow recovering, radiation sickness, suppressed immunity, paradontitis 
 
 
may cause dyspepsia, allergy 
 
 
is contraindicated in severe disturbances of leukopoiesis, aplastic anemia, 
leukemia, cancer. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 

Chapter 21.  DRUGS ACTING ON HEMOPOIESIS (HEMATINICS) 
277
 
Pentoxylum acts similar to methyluracilum, but irritates the skin and mucous 
membranes; is not applied rectally or topically. 
 
Sodium nucleinate is produced by hydrolysis of nucleic acids; may be admi- 
nistered parenteraly; causes allergic reactions. 
 
Molgrastim is glycoprotein, natural colony stimulating factor which 
stimulates the proliferation and differetiation of granulocytes precursors in the 
bone marrow; is administered IV for the treatment of agranulocytosis. 
 
Lenograstim is recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, 
stimulates the proliferation and differentiation of progenitor cells of the 
neutrophilic series, causes an increase of neutrophils count in the blood, increases 
the functional activity of neutrophils; is used for prevention and treatment of 
neutropenia 
caused 
chemotherapeutic 
anti-tumor 
agents, 
bone 
marrow 
transplantation, or aplastic dis-eases of the hematopoietic system; can cause pain 
in the muscles and bones, enlarged spleen, thrombocytopenia, anemia, epistaxis, 
dysuria, headache, diarrhea, and fever as side effects. 
 
LEUKOPOIESIS INHIBITORS AND ANTI-CANCER DRUGS 
 
Leukopoiesis inhibitors are drugs for the treatment of leukemia and cancer. 
They inhibit functions of DNA at different stages of a cell cycle and are 
cytostatics. These drugs also are immunity depressants. They are also used in 
collagenosis and autoimmune diseases. 
 
MAIN GROUPS OF LEUKOPOIESIS INHIBITORS 
 
Mechanism of action and clinical use 
 
Antimetabolites (methotrexate, 6-mercaptopurin) are structural analogs of 
natural compounds and block enzymes participating in the synthesis of nucleic 
acids (fig. 21.4). Their maximal cytotoxic effects are S-phase specific. 
Methotrexate is used to treat acute lymphocytic leukemia, Burkitt’s lymphoma, 
chorioncarcinoma, breast cancer, head and neck carcinomas. 6-mercaptopurine is 
used in the maintenance of remission of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. 

278 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 21.4. Mechanism of action of methotrexate (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Alkylating agents (Chlorbutinum, Dopanum, Myelosanum etc.) are 
biotrans-formated in anions interacting with nucleophylic centers of DNA (fig. 
21.5). As a result, they inhibit the reduplication of DNA and m-RNA synthesis 
that is lethal for tumor cells. They are used to treat lymphatic and solid cancer. 
Alkylating agents are highly toxic for all rapidly divided cells. They are mutagenic 
and cancerogenic (may cause secondary malignancy). 
 
Antibiotics (dactinomycin, rubomycin etc.) inhibit the reduplication of DNA 
by the mechanism of intercalation (fig. 21.5). Effects are maximal in the S and G2 
phases (cell-cycle specific agents). They are used for the treatment of acute 
lymphocytic leukemia, lymphomas, sarcomas and a variety of carcinomas. 
 
Enzyme (L-asparaginase) destructs amino acid asparagine. L-aspraginase 
hy-drolyzes blood asparagine and thus deprives the tumor cells of this nutrient 
required for protein synthesis. It is used to treat childhood acute lymphocytic 
leukemia in combination with vincristine and prednisolone. 
 
Alkaloids (vinblastine, vincristine etc.) are “mytotic“ poisons; they block myto-
sis on the stage of metaphase (cycle-specific agents).Vinca alkaloids are microtubule 
inhibitors (fig. 21.6). Vincristine is used in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia in children, lymphomas, Wilm’s tumor, soft tissue sarcomas. Vinblastine is 
used in the combined treatment of lymphomas and metastatic testicular carcinoma. 
 
Steroid hormones. Glucocorticoids (prednisolone) inhibit the proliferation of 
lymphoid tissue. They are used in patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia and 

Chapter 21.  DRUGS ACTING ON HEMOPOIESIS (HEMATINICS) 
279
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 21.5. Mechanism of action of alkylating agents and anti-tumor antibiotics (by H. 
Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Microtubules 
 
Inhibition of of mitotic spindle formation 
 
Vinca 
 
alkaloids 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vinca rosea 
 
 
Fig. 21.6. Mechanism of action of alkaloids (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 

280 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
lymphomas. Sex hormones and their antagonists are used in the treatment of 
hormone-dependent cancer of breast (in women), prostate and testis (in men). 
Monoclonal antibodies. The mechanisms of tumor cell killing by antibodies 
(Rituximab, Ibritumomab, Gemtuzumab etc.) can be due to direct cell killing, such as 
through receptor blockade or agonist activity, induction of apoptosis, or delivery of a 
drug, radiation, or cytotoxic agent; immune-mediated cell killing mechanisms; 
regulation of T cell function; and specific effects on tumor vasculature and stroma. 
Because of their high target specificity, generally low toxicity and the ability to 
activate the immune system, the use of therapeutic antibodies for the treatment of 
cancer and hematoliogical malignancy is very promising. 
 
Common side-effects 
 
 
The suppression of hemopoiesis, leukopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia 
 
 
The suppression of immunity 
 
 
A toxic action on CNS (headache, vertigo, nausea, vomiting) 
 
 
A toxic action on the GI tract (a loss of appetite, dyspepsia) 
 
 
Necrotic lesions in the skin and mucous membranes including necrotic 
stomatitis 
 
 
Alopecia. 
 
All the listed side-effects are reversible, but some of them are dangerous 
for the patient and must be treated. 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Only one drug inhibits leukopoiesis: 
 
 
Fercovenim 
 
 
Ferroplex 
 
 
Pentoxilum 
 
 
6-Mercaptopurine 
 
 
Methyluracilum. 
 
№2. All the listed is correct, except: 
 
 
Coamid is an additional drug for the treatment of hypochromic anemia 
 
 
Ferroplex is combined preparation containing the iron and the ascorbic acid 
 
 
Folic acid inhibits DNA reduplication in erythrocytes precusors 
 
 
Pentoxilum is used for the treatment of leukopenia 
 
 
Inhibitors of leukopoiesis are cytostatics and immunity depressants. 

Chapter 21.  DRUGS ACTING ON HEMOPOIESIS (HEMATINICS) 
281
 
 
№3. The main effects of cyanocobalamin include: 
 
 
The transformation of megaloblastic erythropoiesis into normoblastic one 
 
 
The improvement of leukocytes forming 
 
 
An increase in the amount of thrombocytes 
 
 
An anti-platelet action 
 
 
Reducing of the neurological symptoms of megaloblastic anemia. 
 
№4. Inhibitors of leukopoiesis are used to treat: 
 
 
Acute leukemia 
 
 
Cancer 
 
 
Aplastic anemia 
 
 
Psoriasis and some collagen diseases 
 
 
Leukopenia. 
 
№5. A patient has the pale skin and mucous membranes, weakness, tachycardia. 
The total amount of red blood cells is 3,5×1012/L. Colored index is 0,76. It is 
known, that he has gastritis with lower acidity of gastric juice. Point out a 
correct diagnosis and the basic preparation for the therapy. 
 
 
Iron-deficient anemia, ferrum-lek 
 
 
Hemolytic anemia, prednisolone 
 
 
Anemia due to chronic renal failure, epoetin 
 
 
Hemochromatosis, desferal 
 
 
Megaloblastic anaemia, cyanocobalamin. 
 
Answers: 
 
№ 1 – D; № 2 – C; № 3 – A, B, C, E; № 4 – A, B, D; № 5 – A. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 DRUGS ACTING ON 
BLOOD COAGULATION 
AND FIBRINOLYSIS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HEMOSTASIS AND FIBRINOLYSIS 
 
Hemostasis is the arrest of bleeding from damaged blood vessels. It is a 
complex cascade of enzymatic reactions. 
The damage of blood vessel causes vasospasm, platelet aggregation and ad-
hesion. It results in the formation of platelet plug, activation of clotting factors, 
conversion of fibrinogen to insoluble fibrin, clot formation, and the stop of bleeding 
(fig. 22.1). Natural clotting limitation factors are heparin and antithrombin III. 
 
Fibrinolysis is the lysis of thrombus for the restoration of the blood flow: 
plasminogen (pro-fibrinolysin) converts into plasmin (fibrinolysin) and causes the 
lysis of fibrin clot. 
 
Pathology of hemostasis and fibrinolysis: 
 
 
A decrease in blood coagulation and (or) an increase in fibrinolysis result 
in bleeding 
 
An increase in blood coagulation and (or) a decrease in fibrinolysis result 
in thrombosis, thromboembolism, syndrome of disseminated intravasal 
blood coagulation. 

Chapter 22.  DRUGS ACTING ON BLOOD COAGULATION AND FIBRINOLYSIS 
283
Platelets 
Endothelial 
defect 
XII 
Tissue 
thrombo- 
kinase 
XIIa 
PF3 
VIIa 
VII 
Vessel 
rupture 
 
 
Fibrin 
 
 
Fig. 22.1. Initial stage of blood coagulation (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
DRUGS AFFECTING BLOOD 
 
COAGULATION AND FIBRINOLYSIS 
 
Drugs affecting blood coagulation and fibrinolysis include coagulants, antico-
agulants, anti-platelet drugs, fibrinolytic drugs, inhibitors of fibrinolysis (fig. 22.2). 
 
COAGULANTS 
 
Coagulants are preparations increasing blood coagulation. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 Direct-acting (are active in vivo, as well as in vitro) 
 
–  Thrombin 
 
–  Spongia haemostatica 
 
–  Fibrinogen 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
– Eptacog alfa (NovoSeven) 
 
–  Calcium chloride 
 
–  Calcium gluconate 
 
 Indirect- acting (are active only in vivo) 
 
–  Vitamin K (Phytomenadion) 
 
–  Vikasolum. 
 
 Drugs of other mechanism of action 
 
– Etamsylate (Dicynone). 
 
 
DRUGS AFFECTING BLOOD 
 
COAGULATION AND FIBRINOLYSIS 
 
Coagulants 
 
Anticoagulants 
 
Anti-platelet drugs 
 
Fibrinolytics 
 
Inhibitors of fibrinolysis 
 
Fig. 22.2. Groups of drugs acting on blood coagulation and fibrinolysis. 
 
DIRECT-ACTING COAGULANTS 
 
Thrombin is an active compound of the blood coagulation system, is used for 
the bleeding from capillaryl vessels, is applied only topically (IV administration 
may cause disseminated thrombosis). 
 
Fibrinogen is a non-active compound of the blood coagulation system, is 
used by IV infusion for the bleeding from bigger vessels, hypofiibrinogenemia, 
dissemi-nated intravasal blood coagulation. 
 
Eptacog alfa (NovoSeven) ia a recombinant activated factor VII (VIIa); interacts 
with thrombin-activated platelets to produce thrombin burst leading to accelerated 
fibrin clot formation localized to the site of vascular injury; is approved for use as an 
intravenous hemostatic agent in patients with congenital hemophilia, for acquired 
hemophilia, factor VII deficiency, and Glanzmann thrombasthenia; is not immuno-
genic in patients with hemophilia and has very low thrombogenicity. 

Chapter 22.  DRUGS ACTING ON BLOOD COAGULATION AND FIBRINOLYSIS 
285
 
Calcium chloride, calcium gluconate contain calcium ions which are the 
components of the blood coagulation system, stimulate the formation of active 
clotting factors, are used parenteraly for bleeding, for the prophylaxis of bleeding, 
for a decrease of capillary permeability. Properties of calcium salts are described 
in detail in chapter 28. 
 
INDIRECT-ACTING COAGULANTS 
 
VIKASOLUM 
 
 
is an indirect-acting coagulant, a water-soluble synthetic vitamin K 
 
 
is administered orally, IM, rarely IV; develops a therapeutic effect slowly 
in 12-18 hrs 
 
takes part in the synthesis of clotting factors in the liver (fig. 22.3) 
 
 
is used for the prophylaxis of bleeding, for chronic and repeated bleedings, 
radiation sickness, liver diseases, overdose of indirect-acting anticoagulants 
 
 
is contraindicated to patients with hypercoagulation, thrombosis, throm-
boembolism. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 22.3. Mechanism of action of vitamin K derivatives (Vikasolum) 
 
and their antagonists (coumarin derivatives) (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
HEMOSTATIC DRUGS OF OTHER MECHANISM OF 
ACTION 

286 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
ETAMSYLATE 
 
 
promotes angioprotective and proaggregant action, stimulates 
thrombopoie-sis and their release from bone marrow 
 
has hemostatic action which is due to activation of thromboplastin 
formation on damaged sites of small blood vessels and a decrease of PgI2 
(prostacyclin) synthesis; stimulation of platelet aggregation and adhesion 
 
 
stabilises capillaries, reinforcing capillary membranes by polymerising 
hyaluronic acid; reduces oedema 
 
is used for prophylaxis and control of capillary bleeding of different etiology 
 
(menorrhagia and metrorrhagia without organic pathology, trans-urethral 
resection of the prostate, hematemesis, melena, hematuria), epistaxis; 
secondary bleeding due to thrombocytopenia or thrombocytopathia, hy-
pocoagulation, prevention of periventricular hemorrhages in prematurely 
born children. 
 
ANTICOAGULANTS 
 
Anticoagulants are drugs decreasing blood coagulation. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 Direct-acting (are active in vivo, as well as in vitro) 
 
– Heparin 
 
– Fraxiparine 
 
– Enoxaparin 
 
– Fondaparinux 
 
– Rivaroxaban 
 
 Indirect-acting (are active only in vivo) 
 
–  Warfarin 
 
– Ethyl biscoumacetate (Neodicumarinum) 
 
– Phenindione (Phenylin). 
 
DIRECT-ACTING ANTICOAGULANTS 
 
HEPARIN 
 
Heparin is a natural substance produced by mast cells. High concentration of 
heparin is observed in the lungs and in the wall of the intestine. It belongs to acidic 

Chapter 22.  DRUGS ACTING ON BLOOD COAGULATION AND FIBRINOLYSIS 
287
 
mucopolysaccharides (fig. 22.4). A disaccharide component of heparin shows 
nega-tive charges due to the carboxyl and sulfate groups. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mast cell 
 
 
Fig. 22.4. Chemical structure of heparin (A) and its sources (B) 
 
(by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered IV, IM, SC, topically 
 
 
begins to act immediately after IV administration and acts during 4-6 hrs 
 
 
begins to act in 15-30 min after IM administration and acts during 6-8 hrs 
 
 
begins to act in 30-60 min after SC administration and acts during 8-12 hrs 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver by heparinase 
 
 
is excreted with urine. 
 
Mechanism of action 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Heparin binds to anti-thrombin III, causes its conformational change that 
leads to the rapid inactivation of thrombin and some other clotting factors 
resulting in the inhibition of fibinogen conversion to fibrin (fig. 22.5). 
 
 
Heparin has a negative charge, due to which it is absorbed on blood cells, 
increases a negative charge of platelets resulting in a decrease of platelet 
aggregation and adhesion. 
 
 
Heparin releases lipoprotein lipase from endothelial cells. 
 
 
Activated 
 
clotting factor 
 
,XI a, 
, Xa 
a 
X 
I , 
a 
I 
I 
 
 
 
 
 
X I I 
a , 
 
 
 
 
 
X I 
I I a 
 
 
Inacti- 
Inacti- 
 
vation 
vation 
 
 
 
 
AT III 
AT III 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 22.5. Mechanism of action of heparin (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
a strong rapid decrease in all stages of blood coagulation 
 
 
a decrease in platelet aggregation 
 
 
the improvement of microcirculation and coronary circulation 
 
 
a decrease in lipids concentration in blood serum 
 
 
a decrease in inflammation 
 
 
a decrease in immunity 
 
 
an increase in the synthesis of surfactant in the lungs 

Chapter 22.  DRUGS ACTING ON BLOOD COAGULATION AND FIBRINOLYSIS 
289
 
 
a decrease in blood pressure (in higher doses) 
 
 
a decrease in glucose level in blood serum (in higher doses) 
 
 
an increase in diuresis (in higher doses). 
 
Indications 
 
 
Acute thrombosis and thromboembolism 
 
 
Myocardial infarction 
 
 
Ischemic stroke 
 
 
Prevention of thrombus formation after surgeries 
 
 
Hemodialysis or blood transfusion 
 
 
Thrombophlebitis 
 
 
A syndrome of disseminated intravasal blood coagulation 
 
 
Atherosclerosis 
 
 
Autoimmune diseases 
 
 
Chronic non-specific diseases of the lungs. 
 
The time of bleeding or the time of blood coagulation should be controlled! 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Bleeding 
1. Hemorrhages 
2. Hematomes 
2. Hemorrhagic diathesis 
3. Micro- and macrohematuria 
3. Leukemia 
4. Thrombocytopenia 
4. Anemia 
5. Allergy 
5. Malignant diseases 
6. Osteoporosis 
6. Gastric ulcer 
7. Silvering of the hair. 
7. Hypertension 
8. Severe diseases of the liver and kidney. 
 
In overdose – induce of Protamine sulfate! 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Fraxiparine is low molecular weight heparin (LMWH); is administered SC 
once a day; has bigger bioavailability, longer duration of action, less binding with 
plasma proteins than heparin; depresses activated Stuart-Prauers factor more than 
thrombin; is used for treatment of thromboflebitis, prevention of thrombus forma-
tion after surgeries. 
 
Enoxaparin is LMWH; is used to prevent or to treat deep vein thrombosis, 
therapy of unstable angina and myocardial infarction; is given SC or IV; has such side 

290 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
effects as thrombocytopenia, elevations in serum aminotransferases level, hematuria, 
bleeding, anemia, ecchymosis, peripheral edema, injection site hemorrhage or pain. 
 
Fondaparinux is an anticoagulant chemically related to low molecular 
weight heparins; is a synthetic pentasaccharide factor Xa inhibitor; is given SC 
daily; is used for prevention of deep vein thrombosis in the patients who have had 
orthopedic surgery, for the treatment of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary 
embolism; the advantage over LMWH or unfractionated heparin is that the risk for 
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia is substantially lower. 
 
Rivaroxaban is the first available orally active direct factor Xa inhibitor; inhibits 
both free Factor Xa and Factor Xa bound in the prothrombinase complex; is well 
absorbed from the gut and develops maximal inhibition of factor Xa 4 hrs after a dose; 
the effects last 8–12 hrs, but factor Xa activity does not return to normal within 24 hrs; 
is used for prevention of venous thromboembolism in patients with atrial fibrillation, 
elective hip and knee replacement surgery; can caue bleeding, including severe internal 
bleeding (possible antidote (andexanet alfa) is being investigated). 
 
INDIRECT-ACTING ANTICOAGULANTS 
 
ETHYL BISCOUMACETATE (NEODICUMARINUM) 
 
It is an indirect-acting anticoagulant, coumarin derivative (fig. 22.6). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 22.6. Chemical structure of Neodicumarinum. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally 
 
 
is absorbed in the GI tract 

Chapter 22.  DRUGS ACTING ON BLOOD COAGULATION AND FIBRINOLYSIS 
291
 
 
binds to proteins in blood plasma 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver 
 
 
begins to act in 2-3 hrs after the administration 
 
 
develops a maximal action in 12-30 hrs after the administration 
 
 
acts during 48 hrs after the end of treatment 
 
 
is excreted by urine. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Mechanism of action of Neodicumarinum, warfarin, and other indirect-acting 
anticoagulants is the block of epoxide reductase in the liver. 
 
The inhibition of this enzyme leads to the block in the creation of vitamin K 
active form and the inhibition of the synthesis of clotting factors (fig. 22.3). 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
a decrease in blood coagulation 
 
 
an increase in fibrinolysis 
 
 
a decrease in lipids concentration in blood. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Acute thrombosis (together with or after heparin’s usage) 
 
 
Myocardial infarction 
 
 
Ischemic insult 
 
 
Thromboembolism 
 
 
Thrombophlebitis 
 
 
The prevention of thrombus formation after surgeries. 
Index of prothrombin should be controlled! 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Bleeding 
1. Hemorrhages 
2. Forming of hematomes 
2. Hemorrhagic diathesis 
3. Hematuria 
3. Gastric ulcer 
4. Dyspepsia 
4. Malignant diseases 
5. Suppression of the liver function 
5. Diseases of the liver and kidney 
6. Allergy. 
6. Pregnancy. 
 
For the treatment of overdose – Vikasolum! 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 

292 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Warfarin decreases blood coagulation by inhibiting vitamin K epoxide 
reduc-tase, an enzyme that recycles oxidized vitamin K1 to its reduced form after 
it has participated in the carboxylation of several blood coagulation proteins 
(prothrombin and factor VII); onset of the effect requires about 2 to 3 days and the 
duration of action of a single dose is 2-5 days. 
 
Phenindione (Phenylin) is indirect-acting anticoagulant; indandione 
derivative has the same mechanism of action as Neodicumarinum; starts to act 
slower, has longer duration of action; may cause pink discoloration of urine 
resulting from excretion of drug and its metabolites. 
 
ANTI-PLATELET DRUGS 
 
Anti-platelets are preparations which inhibit platelet aggregation in blood. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 COX-inhibitors 
 
–  Acetylsalicylic acid (Aspirin) 
 
 Inhibitors of phosphodiesterase 
 
–  Dipyridamole 
 
– Pentoxifylline 
 
 Inhibitors of ADP-mediated aggregation 
 
–  Ticlopidine (Ticlide). 
 
– Clopidogrel 
 
Anti-platelet action of aspirin 
 
Aspirin irreversibly inhibits platelet COX-1. In such a way, it prevents the 
synthesis of thromboxane A2 and decreases platelet aggregation (fig. 22.7). This 
effect occurs in lower doses (less than 0,5 per day) and lasts more than 48 hrs (till 
7 days). In higher doses aspirin also inhibits the synthesis of prostacycline. The 
drug is completely described in chapter 13 as a non-narcotic analgesic. 
 
Pentoxifylline is methylated xanthine derivative, a competitive nonselective 
PDE inhibitor which raises intracellular cAMP, reduces inflammation and innate 
im-munity; improves red blood cell deformability, reduces blood viscosity and 
decreases the potential for platelet aggregation and thrombus formation; is used to 
treat pain, cramping, numbness, or weakness in the arms or legs resulting from 
peripheral artery disease. Side effects are stomach discomfort, nausea, vomiting, 
indigestion, dizziness, flushing,. Rare adverse reactions are angina, palpitations, 
bleeding, hallucinations, arrhythmias, and aseptic meningitis. 

Chapter 22.  DRUGS ACTING ON BLOOD COAGULATION AND FIBRINOLYSIS 
293
 
 
 
Membrane 
 
phospholipids 
 
 
ASPIRIN 
 
Arachidonic 
 
acid 
 
 
COX-1 
 
Prostaglandin H2 
 
 
 
 
Thromboxane A2 
 
 
Fig. 22.7. Mechanism of anti-platelet action of aspirin. 
 
Anti-platelet action of dipyridamole 
 
Dypiridamole inhibits adenosine desaminase and phosphodiesterase in platelets, 
 
increases cAMP concentration in the cells and inhibits thromboxane A2 synthesis that 
leads to a decrease in platelet aggregation. It also increases the prostacycline level. 
 
A detailed description of the drug is represented in chapter 17. 
Anti-platelet action of ticlopidine 
 
Ticlopidine irreversibly blocks purinergic receptors for ADP in platelet mem-
branes. The inhibition of ADP-induced expression of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors in 
the platelet membrane decreases platelet aggregation. Because of neutropenia and 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura it is used if aspirin is not tolerated. 
 
Clopidogrel is a prodrug, specifically and irreversibly inhibits the P2Y12 subtype 
of ADP receptor, which is important in activation of platelets. Patients with variants in 
cytochrome P-450 have lower levels of the active metabolite and less inhibition of 
platelets by the drug. Onset of effects is about 2 hrs and lasts for 5 days; a loading dose 
is administered when a rapid effect is needed. Side effects include headache, nausea, 
itching, and heartburn, bleeding and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
 
Fibrin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plasmin-inhibitors 
Plasmin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Streptokinase 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plasminogen 
Streptococci 
 
Fig. 22.8. Mechanism of action of streptokinase 
and plasmin inhibitors (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 

Chapter 22.  DRUGS ACTING ON BLOOD COAGULATION AND FIBRINOLYSIS 
295
 
Common indications to anti-platelets usage 
 
Indications to anti-platelets usage 
 
 
The prevention of thrombosis and re-thrombosis (as the discontinuation 
of anticoagulant therapy) 
 
The prophylaxis of myocardial infarction and insult 
 
 
The prophylaxis of thrombosis after surgeries 
 
 
Angioplastics 
 
 
The prevention of thrombosis in patients with prosthetic cardiac valves 
 
 
Thrombophlebitis. 
 
DRUGS AFFECTING FIBRINOLYSIS 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Fibrinolytic drugs 
 
 
Direct-acting 
 
–  Fibrinolysin 
 
 
Indirect-acting (activators of pro-fibrinolysin) 
 
 
non-selective 
 
–  Streptokinase 
 
 
selective (tissue plasminogen activators, t-PA) 
 
–  Alteplase 
 
– Tenecteplase B. 
Inhibitors of fibrinolysis 
 
Direct-acting 
 
–  Contrykal 
 
 
Indirect-acting 
 
–  Aminocaproic acid. 
 
FIBRINOLYTICS 
 
Fibrinolytics are drugs producing the lysis of the blood clot. 
 
FIBRINOILYSIN 
 
 
is the protein from the donors’ plasma, the active factor of fibrinolysis 
 
 
is administered by IV infusion 
 
 
has a direct action on fibrin and dissolves fibrin clot in the first hours 
after thrombosis 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
is used for the treatment of acute thrombosis, acute myocardial infarction, 
thrombophlebitis 
 
may cause bleeding resulting from an increase in fibrinolysis, allergy, 
anaphylaxis, arrhythmia, hypotension 
 
is contraindicated in bleeding, a cerebral vascular accident, recent trauma 
of the brain, surgery, uncontrolled hypertension. 
  
STEPTOKINASE 
 
 
is the proteolytic enzyme from hemolytic streptococcus 
 
 
acts indirectly, promotes the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, 
causes systemic activation of fibrinolysis and degradation both of fibrin 
and fi-brinogen resulting in the dissolving of thrombus (fig. 22.8) 
 
has a plasma half-life of 23 min; is administered by IV infusion 
(intracoro-nary infusion in myocardial infarction) 
 
is more potent than fibrinolysin 
 
 
does not cause arrhythmia. 
 
TISSUE PLASMINOGEN ACTIVATORS 
 
Alteplase (Actilise) is tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA), product of 
biotech-nology; has a half-life of 5 min, is administered by IV infusion; has high 
affinity for fibrin and acts selectively on plasminogen bound with thrombus. 
 
Tenecteplase is an enzyme used as a thrombolytic drug; a tissue plasminogen 
activator produced by recombinant DNA technology; binds to the fibrin component of 
the thrombus and selectively converts thrombus-bound plasminogen to plasmin, which 
degrades the fibrin matrix of the thrombus; has a higher fibrin specificity and greater 
resistance to inactivation by its endogenous inhibitor compared to native t-PA; has 
plasma half-life of 20-24 min; is administered by IV infusion. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 22.9. Mechanism of action of tissue plasminogen activators 
 
INHIBITORS OF FIBRINOLYSIS 
 
Inhibitors of fibrinolysis are drugs with anti-enzymic activity which decrease 
fibrinolysis and proteolysis. 
 
CONTRYKAL 
 
 
is a direct-acting inhibitor of fibrinolysis and proteolysis 
 
 
is administered IV slowly or by IV infusion 
 
 
binds to plasmin and inactivates it, inhibits the activity of trypsin (fig. 22.8) 
 
 
inhibits fibrinilysis and stops bleeding caused by the activation of 
fibrinoly-sis; inhibits proteolysis and inflammation 
 
is indicated in bleeding resulting from the activation of fibrinolysis; myo-
cardial infarction; acute pancreatitis; prophylaxis of proteolytic complica-
tions after surgeries on the pancreas, the thyroid gland, the bigger 
salivary glands, and lungs 
 
 
may cause allergy, nausea, vomiting, hypotension, tachycardia. 
 
AMINOCAPROIC ACID 
 
 
is an indirect-acting inhibitor of fibrinolysis 
 
 
is administered orally and by IV infusion, acts during 4-6 hrs, is not me-
tabolized, is excreted with urine 
 
interacts with plasminogen and inhibits its transformation into plasmin, 
partly inhibits plasmin; inhibits proteolytic enzymes 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
inhibits fibrinolysis and decreases bleeding caused by the activation of 
fibrinolysis; suppresses proteolysis, decreases inflammation, has an anti-
allergic action, stimulates the antitoxic function of the liver 
 
 
has indications which are similar to that of contrykal; is also used in a syn-
drome of disseminated intravasal blood coagulation, obstetrics pathology 
 
(ablation placenta, uterine hemorrhages), liver diseases, hypoplastic anemia 
 
 
may cause side-effects, such as dizziness, hypotension, bradycardia, ar-
rhythmia, skin rash, vomiting, nausea. 
  
PHLEBOTONICS 
 
Phlebotonics are a heterogenous class of drugs consisting of plant extracts 
(i.e. diosmin (detralex), aescusan) and synthetic compounds (i.e. calcium 
dobesilate). They are known to improve venous tone, stabilize capillary 
permeability and increase lymphatic drainage. These drugs are used to treat 
chronic venous insufficiency, lymphoedema and haemorrhoids. 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Drug for the prevention of bleeding is only: 
 
 
Heparin 
 
 
Vikasolum 
 
 
Thrombin 
 
 
Streptokinase 
 
 
Contrykal. 
 
№2. Aminocapoic acid is: 
 
 
Direct-acting anticoagulant 
 
 
Indirect-acting anticoagulant 
 
 
Fibrinolytic 
 
 
Activator of fibrinolysis 
 
 
Inhibitor of fibrinolysis. 
 
№3. Therapeutic uses of anti-platelet drugs include: 
 
 
The prevention of secondary thrombosis 
 
 
Acute thrombosis 
 
 
Use of prosthetic heart valves 
 
 
Arteriovenous shunt for hemodialysis 
 
 
Thrombophlebitis. 

Chapter 23.  DRUGS ACTING ON RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 
299
 
 
№4. Heparin is an anticoagulant which: 
 
 
Is effective orally 
 
 
Is effective in vivo, as well as in vitro 
 
 
Is the antagonist of vitamin K 
 
 
Is bound with antithrombin and inactivates clotting factors 
 
 
Is used to treat acute thrombosis. 
 
№5. A patient with acute myocardial infarction was treated with intravenous 
infusion of streptokinase. What is the goal of this drug administration? 
 
 
To cause the lysis of thrombus directly 
 
 
To transform plasminogen into plasmin 
 
 
To prevent further thrombosis 
 
 
To prevent platelets activation 
 
 
To decrease the area of necrosis. 
 
Answers: 
 
№ 1 – B; № 2 – E; № 3 – A, C, D, E; № 4 – B, D, E; № 5 – B. 

300 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23 DRUGS ACTING ON the 
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM AND ITS PATHOLOGY 
 
The respiratory system is one of the life-supporting systems of the body. The 
main function of respiration is to supply oxygen to the body and to remove carbon 
dioxide. It also participates in the pH constancy control of inner medium and in 
temperature regulation. 
 
Many drugs in overdose may cause respiratory depression, but opioids cause 
some depression even in therapeutic doses. 
 
The main disorders of the respiratory system are cough and bronchial asthma. 
The emergent conditions result from a deep suppression of the respiratory center, 
status asthmaticus, and pulmonary edema. 
 
Cough is a protective reflex which guards the respiratory passages against the 
entrance of foreign bodies and promotes their expulsion. Cough may be productive and 
non-productive. Productive cough is useful. Non-productive cough is useless and it 
should be stopped. If non-productive cough is due to thick secretion, it is reasonable to 
transform it into productive one. Bronchial asthma is a recurrent episodic short- 

Chapter 23.  DRUGS ACTING ON RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 
301
 
ness of breath caused by bronchoconstriction arising from airway inflammation 
and hyperreactivity. 
 
Chronic asthmatic bronchitis is a persistent airway obstruction, chronic pro-
ductive cough, and a major problem of episodic bronchospasm. 
 
Chronic obstructive disease is a disorder of the respiratory tract resulting 
from generalized bronchial narrowing and the destruction of functional lung tissue 
(emphysema). It is usually characterized by an impaired expiratory outflow that 
re-sponds poorly to therapy. The following respiratory disorders have a chronic 
airway obstruction as a dominant feature. 
 
DRUGS ACTING ON RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 
 
Drugs affecting the respiratory system are divided into 5 groups: 
 
 
Respiratory stimulants 
 
 
Antitussives 
 
 
Expectorants 
 
 
Bronchodilators 
 
 
Drugs used in pulmonary edema. 
 
RESPIRATORY STIMULANTS (ANALEPTICS) 
 
The frequency and depth of breathing are regulated by the breathing center. 
Respiratory stimulants excite the respiratory center and then increase lung 
ventilation and gas metabolism, enhsance the oxygen content and decrease the 
carbon dioxide level. They improve the excretion of metabolites with perspirated 
air, stimulate oxi-dative processes, and normalize acid-based equilibrium. They 
may increase arterial pressure by the excitation of the vasomotor center. 
 
Respiratory stimulants (analeptics) are described in detail in Chapter 14. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 Direct-acting 
 
– Etimizol 
 
 Reflexly-acting 
 
– Lobeline 
 
– Solution of ammonia 
 
 Mixed-acting 
 
– Nikethamide (Cordiaminum) 
 
– Camphor 
 
– Sulfocamphocaine 

302 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Etimizol is a purinergic direct-acting analeptic; increases the frequency and 
depth of respiration, dilates bronchi, promotes surfactant synthesis in the lungs; 
stimulates the production of glucocorticoids, has an anti-inflammatory, anti-
allergic, and immunomodulative action, increases the tone of cardiac and skeletal 
muscles. It is used in overdose of general anesthetics, asphyxia, bronchial asthma, 
and asphyxia of newbons. 
 
Camphor is an analeptic with a mixed mode of action and expectorant 
proper-ties which is used in the suppression of the respiratory center caused by 
infections and intoxications, as well as in pneumonia. 
 
Sulfocamphocaine is a derivative of the sulfocamphoral acid and procaine; 
stimulates the respiratory and vasomotor centers; is used in cases of poisoning 
with narcotic drugs, carbon oxide, in asphyxia, cardiac insufficiency. 
 
Lobeline stimulates N -cholinoreceptors located in carotide glomerules- and 
excite the respiratory center reflexly. Is used as respiratory stimulant very seldom, 
more often in the case of poisoning with carbon oxide. 
 
Solution of ammonia irritates sensitive nerve endings of nasal mucosa and 
then the respiratory center by reflex in the case of dizziness. 
 
ANTITUSSIVES 
 
Antitussives are drugs suppressing cough which are used in the case of dry cough. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Drugs of central action 
 
 
Opioids 
 
–  Codeine phosphate 
 
–  Ethylmorphine hydrochloride 
 
 
Non-opioid drugs 
 
–  Glaucine hydrochloride 
 
–  Oxeladin 
 
–  Prenoxdiazin hydrochloride (Libexinum) 
 
–  Falimint. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Codeine, ethylmorpine are alkaloids of opium and have all the properties of 
narcotic analgesics, but in therapeutic doses they are less potent than morphine by their 
analgesic activity and are highly effective in the suppression of the tussive center; 

Chapter 23.  DRUGS ACTING ON RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 
303
 
may cause tolerance and drug dependence. Codeine is described in chapter 12 as a 
narcotic analgesic. 
 
Glaucine hydrochloride is an alkaloid; inhibits the medulla center of cough 
without tolerance and drug dependence; is taken by mouth to treat diseases of the 
lungs and bronchi accompanied by dry cough; may cause hypotension. 
 
Prenoxdiazin hydropchloride (Libexinum) has a broncholytic and local an-
esthetic effect, realizes its action in bronchi; is administered orally; is used for dry 
cough; may produce the sensation of local anesthesia in the oral cavity. 
 
Falimint has antitussive and antimicrobial effects. 
 
EXPECTORANTS 
 
Expectorants are drugs which transform non-productive cough into productive one. 
Some of these drugs are described in Chapter 4. They are devided into bronchosec- retor 
drugs which assist liquid mucus expelling and mucolytics which melt mucus. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Drugs of central action 
 
 Opioids 
 
– Codeine phosphate 
 
– Codterpine 
 
– Ethylmorphine hydrochloride 
 
 Non-opioid drugs 
 
– Glaucine hydrochloride 
 
– Butamirate citrate 
B. Drugs of peripheral action 
 
– Prenoxdiazin hydrochloride (Libexinum) 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Codeine, ethylmorpine are alkaloids of opium and have all properties of nar-
cotic analgesics, but in therapeutic doses they are less potent than morphine on 
their analgesic activity and are highly effective in suppression of tussive center; 
may cause tolerance and drug dependence. Codeine is described in the Chapter 12 
as narcotic analgesic. 
 
Codterpine is a combined preparation containing codeine, sodium bicarbonate 
and terpinhydrate. Codeine is opioid receptor agonist that reduces the excitability of 
the cough center. Terpinhydrate enhances the bronchial glands secretion and has 

304 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
expectorant effect. Sodium bicarbonate increases pH of the bronchial mucus to the 
alkaline side, reduces the viscosity of the sputum, stimulates motor function of the 
cilliary epithelium in the bronchi. Indications are: dry cough in the diseases of 
lungs and respiratory pathways. 
 
Glaucine hydrochloride is an alkaloid; inhibits medulla center of cough 
with-out tolerance and drug dependence; is taken by mouth to treat diseases of 
lungs and bronchi accompanied by dry cough; may cause hypotension. 
 
Butamirate citrate is synthetic non-opioid antitussive, has a direct effect on 
the cough center; displays antitussive, moderate bronchodilator, expectorant and 
anti-inflammatory effects, improves oxygenation of blood; is used for dry cough 
of any etiology: cough in the pre- and postoperative period, during surgical 
interventions, bronchoscopy, whooping cough; is taken orally; may cause such 
side effects as skin rash, nausea, diarrhea, dizziness, allergic reactions. 
 
Prenoxdiazin hydropchloride (Libexinum) has broncholytic and local 
anesthetic effect, realizes its action in bronchi; is administered orally; is used for 
dry cough; may produce the sensation of local anesthesia in oral cavity. 
 
EXPECTORANTS 
 
Expectorants are drugs which transform non-productive cough into produc-
tive one. Some of these drugs are described in the Chapter 4. They are devided 
into bronchosecretor drugs which assist liquid mucus expelling and mucolytics 
which melt mucus. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 
Bronchosecretor drugs 
 
 Reflexly acting 
 
– Infusion from the herb of Thermopsis 
 
– Decoction from the root of Althea 
 
– Mucaltinum 
 
 Directly acting 
 
– Potassium iodide 
 
– Sodium bicarbonate 
 
 
Mucolytics 
 
 Synthetic 
 
– Acetylcysteine 
 
– Ambroxol 
 
– Bromhexine 

Chapter 23.  DRUGS ACTING ON RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 
305
 
 Enzymes 
 
– Trypsin 
 
– Chymotrypsin 
 
– Ribonuclease. 
 
AMBROXOL 
 
Ambroxol is a bromine-containing compound (fig. 23.1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 23.1. Chemical structure of ambroxol. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally 
 
 
is completely absorbed in the GI tract 
 
 
binds with plasma proteins (90% of absorbed drug) 
 
 
develops maximal concentration in 0,5-3 hrs after administration 
 
 
displays high concentration in the lungs 
 
 
penetrates the blood-brain barrier and placental barrier 
 
 
has T1/2=7-12 hrs 
 
is excreted with urine and nursing mother’s milk. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
The drug stimulates serous cells of the bronchial mucous membrane, 
regulates the ratio between serous and mucous components in sputum (fig. 23.2). 
 
It activates hydrolytic enzymes, increases the release of lysosomes from Clarck’s cells. 

306 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
It stimulates production of surfactant in the lungs and activates the transport 
function of ciliated cells. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
an expectorant action 
 
 
a mucolytic action. 
  
AMBROXOL 
 
 
 
Depolymerizing 
 production of 
 synthesis of 
of acidic mucopoly-sac- 
lysosomal enzymes 
surfactant 
charides 
 sputum viscosity 
 adhesia 
 exudation of 
 sputum evacuation 
plasma into alveoli 
 
 
Fig. 23.2. Ambroxol’s mechanism of action. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Acute and chronic diseases of airways accompanied by the formation of 
dense sputum and non-productive cough 
 
Pneumonia 
 
 
Bronchial asthma 
 
 
Bronchoectasis 
 
 
Respiratory distress-syndrome in newborns. 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Dyspepsia 
1. Ulcer of stomach 
2. Headache 
2. Seizures 
3. Skin rash, urticaria. 
3. Pregnancy 
4. Hypersensitivity. 
 
ACETYLCYSTEINE 
 
It is an amino acid derivative, contains SH- group (fig. 23.3). 

Chapter 23.  DRUGS ACTING ON RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 
307
 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally 
 
 
is well absorbed in the gut 
 
 
undergoes first-pass metabolism in the liver, that’s why bioavailability is 
10% 
 
there is a dynamic balance between free acetylcysteine, protein bound 
drug, and its metabolites in blood plasma 
 
is distributed in the liver, kidney, lungs, and bronchial mucus 
 
 
penetrates placenta 
 
 
developes maximal concentration in 1 hr after the administration 
 
 
has plasma half-life of 2 hrs 
 
 
is excreted with urine and nursing mother’s milk. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 23.3. Chemical structure of acetylcysteine. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
SH-group of acetylcysteine tears disulfide connections in acidic 
mucopoly-saccharides of sputum that leads to the depolymerization of 
mucoproteins and reducing of mucus viscosity. 
 
 
The drug has antioxidant properties. 
 
 
It stimulates the synthesis of glutathion, is a glutathion substitute. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
a mucolytic action 
 
 
an antioxidant action 
 
 
an antidote action in acute poisoning with paracetamol (as glutathion 
substitute). 
 
Indications 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Diseases of the bronchi and lungs accompanied by the formation of dense 
and serous-purulent sputum 
 
Acute and chronic bronchitis 
 
 
Tracheitis due to bacterial infection 
 
 
Pneumonia 
 
 
Bronchoectasis 
 
 
Bronchial asthma 
 
 
Synusitis 
 
 
Mucoviscedosis 
 
 
The evacuation of viscous secretion from airways after surgeries or trauma 
 
 
Overdose of paracetamol. 
 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Dyspepsia, nausea, vomiting, stomatitis 
1. Ulcer of stomach 
2. Allergy (skin rash, itch, urticaria, rarely a spasm 
2. Lungs bleeding 
of bronchi) 
3. Hypersensitivity to 
3. Nasal bleeding, hypotension, palpitation. 
preparation 
4. The retention of sputum if it is used together with 
4. Age till 5. 
antitussives. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Infusion from the herb of Thermopsis, decoction from the root of Althea, 
and Mucaltinum are reflexly acting expectorants. They irritate receptors of the 
stomach mucosa, initiate reflexes by which increase the secretion of bronchial 
glands, the contractility of the epithelium and muscles and help mucus expelling. 
 
Sodium bicarbonate and potassium iodide are directly acting expectorants. 
Potassium iodide excretes through glands, melts the mucus, and stimulates 
secretion. Sodium bicarbonate changes pH to the base district and stimulates the 
secretion of liquid sputum in the bronchi. 
 
Trypsin and chymotrypsin are mucolytics from the group of proteolytic en-
zymes which tear peptide connections, change physicochemical properties of 
mucus. Desoxyribonuclease and ribonuclease produce the depolymerization of 
nucleic acids and in such a way reduce sputum viscosity and promote its 
evacuation. Enzymes are administered IM or by inhalation. They are used to treat 
purulent diseases of bronchi, the lungs, and pleura. 
 
BRONCHODILATORS 

Chapter 23.  DRUGS ACTING ON RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 
309
 
 
BRONCHIAL ASTHMA AND ITS MANAGEMENT 
 
Airflow obstruction in asthma is due to the inflammation of the bronchial wall, 
contraction of bronchial smooth muscle, increased mucus secretion causing shortness 
of breath and makes respiration difficult. An asthmatic attack may be precipitated by 
the inhalation of allergens which interact with mast cells coated with immunoglobulin 
E, generated in response to a previous sensitivity to allergen. The mast cells release 
mediators, such as histamine, leukotrienes, and hemotaxic factors which promote a 
bronchiolar spasm and mucosal thickening from edema and cellular infiltration. 
 
Many asthmatic attacks are not related to a recent exposure to allergen, but 
rather reflect bronchial hyperactivity of unknown origin which is somehow related 
to the inflammation of the airway mucosa. 
 
The symptoms of asthma may be effectively treated by several drugs, but no 
one of the agents provides a cure for this obstructive lung disease. 
 
The management of bronchial asthma includes: 
 
 
avoidance of asthma triggers 
 
 
treatment of allergic inflammation 
 
 
dilatation of bronchi (fig. 23.4). 

310 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
Allergens 
Inflammation 
Antigens, 
Bronchial hyperreactivity 
infections, 
ozone, 
SO2, NO2 
Noxious stimuli 
Bronchial 
spasm 
Dust, 
cold air, 
drugs 
 
 
 
Avoid 
Treat 
Dilate 
exposure 
inflammation 
bronchi 
 
Fig. 23.4. Bronchial asthma and its management (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
THEOPHYLLINE 
 
Theophylline (Euphyllinum) is 1,3-dimetylxantine (fig. 23.5). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 23.5. Chemical structure of theophylline. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 

 
is administered orally, IV, by IV infusion 
 
 
begins to act in 5-15 min after IV administration 
 
 
binds to plasma proteins (60% of drug) 
 
 
is widely distributed in tissues 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver with the participation of cytochrome P-450 
 
 
is excreted with urine; partially is excreted with nursing mother’s milk 
 
 
has a half-life depending on the patient’s age and co-existing pathology 
(in adult patients with bronchial asthma it is 6-12 hrs; in elderly patients 
with CHF– more than 24 hrs). 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
The drug blocks of adenosine receptors. 
 
 
It inhibits PDE resulting in an increase of cAMP concentration and in a 
decrease of Ca++ contents inside the cells. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
the relaxation of the smooth muscles of the bronchi, GI tract, biliary 
system, and uterus 
 
the dilation of coronary, cerebral, and pulmonary blood vessels 
 
 
a decrease of peripheral vascular resistance 
 
 
an increase in the tone of respiratory muscles, stimulation of the respira-
tory center in the brain medulla, the improvement of lungs ventilation 
and saturation of blood by oxygen 
 
 
a decrease in intracranial pressure and edema of the brain tissue 
 
 
an anti-platelet action, the inhibition of thrombus formation, 
normalization of microcirculation 
 
an anti-allergic action due to the inhibition of mast cells degranulation 
 
 
a diuretic action due to a decrease of tubule reabsorption. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Bronchial asthma 
 
 
Spasm of bronchi of different origin 
 
 
Chronic obstructive bronchitis 
 
 
Status asthmaticus 
 
 
Emphysema of the lungs 
 
 
Noctural apnea 
 
 
Apnea of a new born 
 
 
Lungs hypertension 
 
 
Disturbances of cerebral blood circulation, liquor hypertension, edema of 
the brain caused by ischemic stroke. 

312 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Restlessness, insomnia 
 
 
Headache, tremor, seizures 
 
 
Tachycardia, 
arrhythmia, 
hypotension, an increase in the 
frequency of angina attacks 
 
 
Diarrhea, atony of the gut 
 
 
Allergic reactions (skin rash, itch). 
 
 
Contraindications 
 
 
Hypersensitivity 
 
 
Acute heart failure 
 
 
Angina pectoris 
 
 
Acute myocardial infarction 
 
 
Heart arrhythmia 
 
 
Hypotension, severe hypertension 
 
 
Prone to seizures 
 
 
Hyperthyroidism 
 
 
Pregnancy, lactation 
 
 
Hepatic and renal failure 
 
 
Children till 14 (for IV administration). 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER BRONCHODILATORS 
 
Adrenergic agents with β-activity are the drugs of choice for mild intermitted 
asthma. These potent bronchodilators relax airway smooth muscle and inhibit the 
release of substances from mast cells which cause bronchoconstriction. The most 
common agents are β2-adrenomimetics: salbutamol, fenoterol, terbutalin, 
salmeterol, and clenbuterol. 
 
Salbutamol, fenoterol, terbutalin are the drugs of short duration (4-5 hrs) 
and are used for the treatment of asthma attacks. 
 
Salmeterol, clenbuterol have a prolonged action and are used for the preven-
tion of asthma attacks. 
β1,2 adrenomimetics (orciprenaline sulfate) are used seldom. 
 
In an acute attack, adrenaline hydrochloride and ephedrine hydrochloride 
may be administered. 
 
M-cholinoblockers are less effective. Ipratropium bromide, atropine sulfate, 
platyphylline hydrotartrate, Methacinum are used as bronchodilators. They in-
crease the cGMP concentration, decrease Ca++ concentration that leads to smooth 
muscle relaxation. Inhaled ipratropium bromide is useful in patients unable to take 
adrenergic agonists. 
 
Myotropic broncholytics (Xantines). When asthmatic symptoms cannot be 
controlled with adrenergic agents, addition of the methylxanthine derivatives may 
be appropriate. Myotropic bronchodilators relieve an airflow obstruction in acute 
asthma and decrease the symptoms of chronic disease. 
 
Anti-allergic drugs. Cromolyn-sodium is an effective prophylactic agent which 
stabilizes the membrane of mast cells and prevents mediator release by blocking the 
calcium gate. The drug is not useful in the managing of an acute asthmatic attack. 

Chapter 24.  GASTROINTESINAL DRUGS 
313
 
For the use in asthma cromolyn-sodium is administered by inhalation. Because it 
is poorly absorbed only minor adverse effects are associated with it. The pre-
treatment with cromolyn-sodium blocks allergen-induced and exercise induced 
bronchocon-striction. Not all the patients respond to a cromolyn-sodium therapy, 
but those who do respond to the treatment show the improvement which is roughly 
equal to the improvement obtained from theophylline therapy. 
 
Ketotiphen decreases histamine release and blocks H1-histamine receptors. It 
is used for the prophylaxis of bronchospasm. 
 
Fenspiride has anti-exudative effect, interferes with the development of 
bronchospasm, displays the antagonism with mediators of inflammation and al-
lergy: serotonin, histamine (at the level of H1-histamine receptors), bradykinin; 
has spasmolytic effect. When administered in large doses, it reduces the 
production of various inflammation factors (cytokines, arachidonic acid 
derivatives, free radicals). Indications to use include bronchial asthma 
(maintenance therapy), bronchospasm, chronic bronchitis with respiratory failure, 
pharyngitis, otitis, sinusitis, whooping cough, allergic rhinitis. 
 
There are also anti-leukotriene modulators (zafirlukast), leukotriene receptor 
antagonists, and leukotriene synthesis inhibitors (zileuton). They are administered 
orally or by inhalation, have a slow onset of action, long duration of action (12-24 hrs) 
and are used for the prophylaxis and chronic treatment of asthma. 
 
Glucocorticoids. Prednisolone, dexamethasone, triamcinolone, and be-
clomethasone are used for the prevention of bronchial asthma attacks. 
 
Combained preparations. Berodual causes a pronounced bronchodilating 
effect due to the action of its constituents ipratropium bromide and fenoterol. 
Seretid is a combined bronchodilator containing salmeterol and fluticasone 
propionate, which have different mechanisms of action. 
 
DRUGS USED IN PULMONARY EDEMA 
 
Edema of the lungs is an urgent state characterized by an increase of 
hydrostatic pressure in lung vessels, exudation into alveoli, and disturbances in 
lungs ventilation. Pulmonary edema accompanies CHF, infections, intoxications. 
 
Agents used in the treatment of pulmonary edema are: 
 
 
Drugs decreasing hydrostatic pressure in lung vessels: 
 
–  Sodium nitroprusside and organic nitrates (nitroglycerine, isosorbide dinitrate) 
 
–  Ganglioblockers (Pentamine, Benzohexonium, Hygronium) 
 
 
Broncholytics (Euphyllinum) 
 
 
Drugs with α-blocking properties (chlorpromazine) 
 
 
Opioid analgesics (morphine hydrochloride) 

314 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B 
 
Fig. 24.2. Pathogenesis of peptic ulcer disease and gastritis: 
 
A – duodenal ulcer and hyperacidic gastritis; B – gastric ulcer and hypoacidic gastritis 
(http://www.picsearch.com). 

Chapter 24.  GASTROINTESINAL DRUGS 
315
 
 
Corticosteroids (prednisolone, dexamethasone) 
 
 
Drugs improving heart contractility: 
 
–  Cardiac glycosides (Corglycon, digoxin, strophanthin) 
 
–  Non-glycoside inotropics (dobutamine) 
 
 
Drugs decreasing circulating blood volume: 
 
–  Loop diuretics (furosemide, torasemide) 
 
– Osmotic diuretics in the conditions of tolerance to furosemide (mannitol, 
Urea pura) 
 
Drugs that restore normal bronchial passage due to an antifoam action 
(vaporized alcohol). 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. All the following concerning glaucine is correct, except: 
 
 
It is non-opiod antitussive 
 
 
It has a central action 
 
 
It suppresses cough 
 
 
It decreases BP 
 
 
It stimulates respiratory center. 
 
№2. Long-acting β-adrenergic agonist for treatment of bronchial asthma is: 
 
 
Adrenaline 
 
 
Salbutamol 
 
 
Fenoterol 
 
 
Salmeterol 
 
 
Isoprenaline. 
 
№3. Theophylline is: 
 
 
Contraindicated in tachyarrhythmia 
 
 
Synthetic catecholamine 
 
 
Bronchodilator 
 
 
PDE inhibitor 
 
 
Expectorant. 
 
№4. Ambroxol produces: 
 
 
The stimulation of surfactant synthesis 
 
 
An expectorant action 
 
 
The dilatation of bronchi 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
An anti-allergic action 
 
 
The stimulation of respiration. 
 
 
№5. A patient with bronchial asthma addresses to his doctor with complaints 
of unpleasant palpitations that occur after the usage of an inhalation 
form of isoprenaline (Isadrinum). The doctor advices him to use 
salbutamol. What is the mechanism of salbutamol’s action? 
 
The stimulation of β1-adrenoceptors 
 
The stimulation of β2-adrenoceptors 
 
The stimulation of α1-adrenoceptors 
 
The stimulation of α2-adrenoceptors 
 
The inhibition of M-chlolinoreceptors. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – E; № 2 – D; № 3 – A, C, D; № 4 – A, B; № 5 –B. 

Chapter 24.  GASTROINTESINAL DRUGS 
317
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 GASTROINTESINAL DRUGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FUNCTIONS OF THE GI TRACT 
 
AND THE MAIN GASTOINTESTINAL DISEASES 
 
The main GI tract functions are digestion and absorption of food. It also plays 
the role of one of the major endocrine systems in the body. Gastric exocrine cells 
secrete pepsinogen, the hydrochloric acid, and an intrinsic factor. In addition to 
this, the cells of the gastric mucous membrane secrete mucus and bicarbonates, 
forming together a gel-like protecting layer. The most common disorders of 
gastric secretion are peptic ulcer and gastritis. 
 
Under physiological conditions in the pancreatic gland most of digestive en-
zymes are contained in granules in the inactive form (zymogen). These enzymes 
are activated by enterokinase after they reach the duodenum. In acute pancreatitis 
enzymes become activated inside the pancreatic tissue causing autodigestion. In 
chronic pancreatitis enzyme insufficiency develops. 
 
Disturbances of gastric motility may be manifested by nausea, vomiting, a 
gastroesophageal reflux, delayed gastric emptying. A vomiting reflex can be 
useful in the case of the ingestion of toxic substances, but it is in most cases an 
unpleasant side-effect accompaning administration of many drugs. 

318 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Abnormalities of intestinal motility can be manifested mainly by constipation 
or diarrhea. 
 
GASTROINTESTINAL DRUGS 
 
Drugs acting on the GI tract are divided into several groups (fig.24.1). 
 
 
GASTROINTESTINAL DRUGS 
 
Drugs influencing appetite 
 
Drugs influencing gastric secretion 
 
Drugs affecting gastric motility 
 
Drugs influencing pancreatic secretion 
 
Drugs affecting intestinal motility 
 
Drugs for hepatobiliary disorders 
 
Fig. 24.1. Groups of gastrointestinal drugs. 
 
Among them, there are agents influencing appetite, drugs used in 
disturbances of the gastric secretory function, drugs affecting gastric motility, 
agents used in disturbances of pancreatic secretion, drugs used in hepatobiliary 
system disorders, and drugs affecting intestinal motility. 
 
DRUGS INFLUENCING APPETITE 
 
Drugs influencing appetite are preparations for the regulation of appetite 
used in gastrointestinal diseases, obesity, or anorexia. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Stimulants of appetite (Appetizers) 
 
 
Bitters 
 
–  Tincture of Absintium 
 
 
Hormonal preparations 
 
–  Insulin 
 
–  Retabolil 
 
B. Suppressors of appetite (Anorexigens) and drugs for the treatment of obesity 

Chapter 24.  GASTROINTESINAL DRUGS 
319
 
 
Adrenergic 
 
–  Amfepranone (Phepranonum) 
 
–  Chlorpheniramine (Desopimon) 
 
–  Mazindol 
 
 
Serotoninerghic 
 
–  Fenfluramine. 
 
 Lipase inhibitors 
 
– Orlistat 
 
PECULIARITIES OF PREPARATIONS 
 
Bitters are used as appetizers. They belong to drugs stimulating afferent 
nerve endings and are described in Chapter 4. 
 
Insulin and retabolil are hormonal preparations with anabolic properties 
applied in cachexia. These drugs are described in Chapter 26. 
 
Anorexigens are appetite suppressors for the treatment of severe obesity. 
They have the central mechanism of action, that’s why these preparations are 
character-ized in Chapter 15. 
 
Orlistat is the saturated derivative of lipostatin, a potent natural inhibitor of 
pancreatic lipases. It prevents the absorption of fats from the human diet by acting 
as a lipase inhibitor and reducing caloric intake. Orlistat is designed to treat 
obesity. It can cause gastrointestinal side effects including steatorrhea. 
 
DRUGS REGULATING 
 
GASTRIC SECRETORY FUNCTION 
 
PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE AND GASTRITIS 
 
Lesions of the mucosal wall that occur in the stomach or duodenum are referred 
to as peptic ulcer disease. Although certain drugs can cause ulcers (in particular 
NSAIDs), the great majority of cases of peptic ulcer disease stems from infection with 
the bacterium Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori). Infection caused by H. pylori produces 
chronic gastritis which is the inflammation of the stomach lining. 
 
Peptic ulcer disease takes two very different courses, depending on the 
predomi-nant location of the gastritis in the stomach. Some individuals produce 
excessive quantities of acid (hypersecretion of acid), and this leads to the 
development of duodenal ulcer (fig. 24.2). This type of response occurs when 
gastritis is localized in the pyloric region. 

320 
PHARMACOLOGY. V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
Antacids 
absorbable 
Acid neutralization 
not absorbable 
CaCO3 
NaHCO3 
CaCO3 
Mg(OH)2 
CaCO 
Al(OH)3 
3 
H2CO3 
H+ 
H+ 
H2O + CO2 
H2O CO2 
H+ 
K+ 
Na+   HCO3– 
Ca2+ 
Ca2+ 
H+ 
Pancreas 
Na+ 
Pancreas 
HCO3– 
Absorption 
CO32– 
CaCO3 
A 
Na+ 
HCO3– 
B 
  
Fig. 24.6. Mechanism of action of absorbable (A) 
 
and non-absorbable antacids (B) (by. H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
If gastritis is located predominantly in the body of the stomach, the disease 
progresses in the form of atrophic gastritis. The inflammation induces apoptosis 
of parietal cells, and there is eventual atrophy of the gastric glands. The result is 
hyposecretion of acid. Continued tissue damage may lead to the development of 
gastric ulcer (fig. 24.2). 
 
H.pylori is classified as a carcinogen because infection increases the risk of 
the developing of certain types of gastric cancer. This increased risk is almost 
exclusively associated with atrophic gastritis and gastric ulcer. 
 
The strategy of pharmacotherapy of peptic ulcer disease and gastritis includes: 
 
 
Eradication of H. pylori through the use of antibiotics 
 
 
Reduction of acid secretion (Reducing the acidity in the stomach lumen 
promotes healing, and it also increases the effectiveness of the antibiotics) 
 
Protection of gastric mucosa 
 
 
Replacement therapy in the condition of acid hyposecretion. 
 
DRUGS USED IN PEPTIC ULCER 

Chapter 24.  GASTROINTESINAL DRUGS 
321
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sucralfate 
 
Fig. 24.7. Sucralfate’s mechanism of action (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
 
Mucus  È 
HCl 
H+ K+ 
ATPase 
 
 
 
Prostaglandin 
Parietal cell 
receptor 
 
 
 
Misoprostol 
 
Induction 
 
of labor 
 
Fig. 24.8. Chemical structure and mechanism of action of misoprostol 
 
(by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
DISEASE AND GASTRITIS 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Stimulants of gastric secretion 

322 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
Helicobacter 
Eradication 
pylori 
Gastritis 
Amoxicillin 
Peptic ulcer 
Clarithromycin 
Omeprazole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 24.9. Antimicrobial agents for eradication of H. Pylori (by. H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
 
–  Pentagastrin 
 
–  Bitters 
 
–  Pepsin 
 
–  Hydrochloric acid (diluted) 
C. Suppressors of gastric secretion 
 
 
M-cholinoblockers 
 
–  Atropine 
 
–  Pirezepine 
 
 
–H
2-Ranitidinehistamine receptor blockers 
 
–  Famotidine 
 
 
Inhibitors of proton pump 
 
–  Omeprazole 
 
– Pantoprazole 
 
– Lansoprazole 
 
 
Gastroprotectors (mucosal protector agents) 
 
 
Coverings 
 
–  Colloidal bithmus subcitrate (De-nol) 
 
–  Sucralfate 
 
 
Ulcer healing drugs 

Chapter 24.  GASTROINTESINAL DRUGS 
323
 
–  Misoprostol 
 
–  Carbenoxolone 
D. Antacids 
 
–  Sodium bicarbonate 
 
–  Calcium carbonate 
 
–  Magnesium hydroxide 
 
–  Aluminium hydroxide 
 
– Combined preparstions (Almagel, Maalox) 
E. Antimicrobial drugs for treatment of peptic ulcer 
–  Metronidazole 
 
–  Amoxicillin 
 
–  Clarithromycin 
 
–  Tetracycline. 
 
DRUGS FOR STIMULATION OF GASTRIC SECRETION 
AND REPLACEMENT THERAPY 
 
Pentagastrin is a synthetic polypeptide that has gastrin-like effects. It stimu-
lates the secretion of gastric acid, pepsin, and intrinsic factor, and has been used as 
a diagnostic agent. Pentagastrin is also used as a stimulation test to elevate of 
several hormones in carcinoid syndrome. It has been used to stimulate ectopic 
gastric mucosa for the detection of Meckels diverticulum. Pentagastrin-stimulated 
calcitonin test is a diagnostic test for medullary carcinoma of the thyroid. 
Pentagastrin may cause panic attacks as side-effect. 
 
Diluted hydrochloric acid, when taken before meals, reduces the pH in the 
stomach to 1.5-2, transforms pepsinogen to active pepsin and creates optimal pH 
for pepsin activity, reduces the peristalsis of the stomach and causes the 
gatekeeper's reflex. It promotes absorption of iron, stimulates the formation of 
gastrin; activates the formation of secretin and cholecystokinin by the mucosa of 
the duodenum. It is used for achilia, hypoacidic conditions, dyspepsia, 
hypochromic anemia (with iron preparations). As replacement therapy very often 
it is used in mixture with pepsin. In the case of long-term use in large doses, 
acidosis and damage of teeth enamel s possible. 
 
OMEPRAZOLE 
 
Omeprazole is a benzimidazole derivative (fig. 24.3). 

324 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 24.3. Chemical structure of omeprazole. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, IV, by IV infusion 
 
 
after the oral administration, is absorbed in the small intestine with bio-
availability of 35-60% 
 
begins to act in 60 min; develops a maximal effect in 2 hrs after the admi- 
nistration and acts during more than 24 hrs 
 
binds to plasma proteins (90-95%) 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver with the formation of hydroxiomeprazole 
 
 
has a half-life of 40-60 min 
 
 
is excreted with urine (80%) and feces. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
It inhibits H+/K+-ATPase (proton pump) which is necessary for the transport of H+ 
from parietal cells of the gastric mucous membrane to the lumen of the stomach (fig. 24.4). 

Chapter 24.  GASTROINTESINAL DRUGS 
325
 
 
 
 
N. vagus 
 
 
 
 
Pirenzepine 
 
 
Parietal cell 
M3 
ACh 
ACh 
M
1 
ATPase 
H+ 
ECL- 
K+ 
H2 
Histamine 
cell 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proton 
Gastrin 
pump inhibitors 
 
H2-Antihistamines 
 
 
Fig. 24.4. Mechanism of action of proton pump inhibitors, H2-antihistamines, 
and selective M-cholinoblockers (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
the inhibition of the final stage of basal and stimulating acid secretion. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Peptic ulcer disease 
 
 
Gasatroesophagal reflux disease 
 
 
Chronic gastritis with the hypersecretion of acid 
 
 
Zolinger-Ellison syndrome. 

326 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Nausea, diarrhea, constipation, meteorism, pain in the 
1. Pregnancy 
stomach 
2. Lactation 
2. Headache, weakness, depression, vision disturbances 
3. Childhood 
3. Skin rash 
4. Severe hepatic 
4. Arthralgia, myalgia, eosinophilia. 
diseases. 
 
Peculiarities of other proton pump inhibitors 
 
Omeprazole, pantoprazole and lansoprazole differ in the details of chemical 
structure, bioavailability, half-life, etc., but the results of their clinical application 
are almost identical. 
 
Lansoprazole has the highest bioavailability in the group, amounting to 80-90%, 
provides an earlier onset of clinical remission in comparison with omeprazole. 
 
Pantoprazole, in contrast to omeprazole and lansoprazole, significantly less 
interacts with the cytochrome P-450 system. Reception of antacids, like food, does 
not affect the pharmacokinetics of the drug. 
 
RANITIDINE 
 
Ranitidine is H2-antihistamine, an etylendiamine derivative (fig. 24.5). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 24.5. Chemical structure of ranitidine. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, IM, IV 
 
 
is well absorbed in the GI tract: absorption is not disturbed by meals or 
antacids 

Chapter 24.  GASTROINTESINAL DRUGS 
327
 
 
starts to act in 15 min, develops a maximal concentration in 2 hrs, has a 
duration of action of 8-12 hrs 
 
is excreted with urine during 24 hrs (40% of a dose). 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
It inhibits H2-histamine receptors in parietal cells of the gastric mucous mem-
brane (fig. 24.4). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
the inhibition of gastric secretion 
 
 
a decrease in the total volume of gastric juice 
 
 
a decrease in pepsin activity. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Peptic ulcer disease 
 
 
Reflux-esophagitis 
 
 
Zolinger-Ellison syndrome 
 
 
bleeding from the upper regions of the GI tract 
 
 
the prophylaxis of bleeding in patients suffering from peptic ulcer 
 
 
the prophylaxis of gastric juice aspiration in surgery under general anes-
thesia. 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Headache, vertigo 
1. Pregnancy 
3. Skin rash 
2. Lactation 
4. An increase in the plasma concentration of 
3. Childhood 
hepatic enzymes 
4. Severe renal and hepatic 
5. Thrombocytopenia 
diseases 
6. Hypersensitivity. 
5. Gastric malignancy. 
 
Peculiarities of other H2-histamine receptor blockers 
 
Famotidine (Quamatel) is histamine H2 receptor antagonist that inhibits stom-ach 
acid production. Unlike cimetidine, the first H2 antagonist, it has no effect on the 
cytochrome P450 enzyme system, and does not appear to interact with other drugs. 
The dose of the drug is less than the dose of ranitidine. Medical uses include treatment 
for gastric and duodenal ulcers, Zollinger–Ellison syndrome and multiple 

328 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
endocrine adenomas, gastroesophageal reflux disease, esophagitis, prevention of 
NSAID-induced peptic ulcers and aspiration pneumonitis in surgery patients. 
 
OTHER GROUPS AND PREPARATIONS 
 
M-cholinoblockers are the inhibitors of acid production. Atropine is a non-
selective preparation rarely used in peptic ulcer disease. Pirenzepine is a selective 
cholinoreceptor 
antagonist, 
unlike 
atropine, 
prefers 
the 
M1 
type 
of 
cholinoreceptors. These drugs are described in Chapter 6. 
 
Antacid drugs are preparations for acid neutralization. Antacids are absorbable 
(NaHCO3) and non-absorbable (CaCO3, Mg(OH)2, Al(OH)3) (fig.24.6). 
They contain H+-binding groups, such as CO32-, HCO3- or OH-. Non-absorbable 
agents are preferred. In this case, systemic absorption of counter ions or basic residues 
is minor. Antacid drugs are taken between meals (1 and 3 hrs after meals and at bed-
time).They can cause a reduced absorption of other drugs, the phosphate depletion of 
the body with an excessive intake of Al(OH)3. Because Mg (OH)2 produces a laxative 
effect and Al(OH)3 produces constipation, these two antacids are frequently used in the 
combination (e.g., well known combined preparations almagel and maalox). 
 
Protective drugs are represented by coverings and ulcer healing drugs. Sucralfate 
contains aluminium hydroxide residues. It is a suspension for oral admin-istration 
minimally absorbed from the gut. The drug is taken on an empty stomach. Sucralfate 
forms an ulcer-adherent complex with proteinaceous exudate at the ulcer site (fig. 
24.7). A sucralfate-albumin film provides a barrier to diffusion of hydrogen ions, 
inhibits pepsin activity in gastric juice by 32%. The drug is indicated in the short-term 
(up to 8 weeks) treatment of active duodenal ulcer. It is well tolerated, rarely may 
cause constipation, diarrhea, dry mouth, gastric discomfort, indigestion, nausea, 
vomiting, pruritus, rash, dizziness, insomnia, sleepiness, vertigo. 
 
Bismuth subcitrate forms a protective cover on the surface of ulcers and ero-
sions, stimulates regeneration by the accumulation of an epidermal growth factor, 
increases prostaglandin E2 synthesis, promotes the production of mucus and 
bicarbo-nates, inhibits the activity of pepsin, has an anti-helicobacter action. It is 
used to treat peptic ulcer disease, chronic gastritis, peptic ulcers caused by 
NSAIDs, functional dyspepsia. The drug has no significant side-effects (it causes 
black discoloration of feces, rarely nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, rash). 
 
Misoprostol is a semisynthetic prostaglandin. It binds to Pg receptors, 
promotes mucus production and inhibits acid secretion, improves the trophy of the 
gastric mucous membrane (fig. 24.8). Additional systemic effects (diarrhea, the 
risk of precipitating contractions of the gravid uterus) limit its therapeutic utility. 
 
Antibiotics and metronidazole are used for the eradication of H.pylori 
(fig.24.9). The properties of these antimicrobial agents are described in Chapters 
31, 33. They are applied in the combination with omeprazole. 

Chapter 24.  GASTROINTESINAL DRUGS 
329
 
DRUGS AFFECTING GASTRIC MOTILITY 
 
MAIN DISORDERS OF GASTRIC MOTILITY 
 
Vomiting is frequently occurred disturbance of gastric motility. It is a reflex 
regulated by the emetic center and central trigger zone (CTZ) in the brain medulla. The 
emetic center may be activated by impulses from the vestibular apparatus, visual, 
olfactory, and gustatory inputs. Psychic stimuli can also cause the stimulation of 
vomiting center. The main neurotransmitters involved in the control of vomiting are 
acetylcholine, histamine, serotonin, dopamine, and substance P (fig. 24.10). 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Prokinetics 
 
– Metoclopramide 
B. Emetics 
–  Apomorphine 
 
–  Ipecacuanna 
 
C. Anti-emetics 
 
 
Cholinergic antagonists 
 
–  Scopolamine (hyoscine) 
 
 
(Dopamine, Seratonin) 
CTZ 
CNS 
(Intrinsic: 
Substance P. 
VOMIT 
Acetylcholine. 
CENTER 
Histamine) 
Vestibular 
Gl Tract 
Apparatus 
(Acetylcholine, Histamine, 
(Acetylcholine, Histamine) 
Serotonin, Substance P 
& mechanoreceptors) 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 24.10. Neurotransmitters participating in a vomit reflex (http://www.picsearch.com). 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
 
H–1-Promethazineantihistamines 
 
–  Diphenhydramine 
 
 
Neuroleptics 
 
–  Chlorpromazine 
 
 
D2-dopamine receptor antagonists 
–  Metoclopramide 
 
– Domperidone 
 
 
5-HT4-antagonists 
–  Ondancetron. 
 
 
METOCLOPRAMIDE 
 
The drug is a synthetic centrally acting agent, an oxibenzamide derivative (fig. 24.11). 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, IM, IV 
 
 
starts to act in 1-3 min after IV injection and in 10-15 min after IM 
admin-istration 
 
 
penetrates CNS and placenta 
 
 
has a duration of a prokinetic effect of 3 hrs, of anti-emetic action – 12 hrs 
 
 
is excreted with urine in an unchanged state (85% of a dose). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 24.11. Chemical structure of metoclopramide. 
 
Mechanism of action 

Chapter 24.  GASTROINTESINAL DRUGS 
331
 
 
Metoclopramide is a specific blocker of D2-dopamine receptors. 
 
It is 5-HT3-antagonist 
 
It inhibits chemoreceptors of the trigger zone 
 
 
The drug inhibits the sensitivity of visceral nerves translating impulses 
from the pylorus and duodenum to the emetic center. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
a decrease in vomiting and nausea 
 
 
an increase in the tone of the stomach and intestine 
 
 
the promotion of gastric evacuation 
 
 
the prevention of a esophagal and pyloric reflux 
 
 
the stimulation of intestinal peristalsis 
 
 
the normalization of the tone of the bile bladder and bile secretion 
 
 
the stimulation of prolactin secretion. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Vomiting and nausea of different origin 
 
 
Disturbances of the gut motility in dyspepsia, reflux-esophagitis, gastro-
duodenitis, peptic ulcer, meteorism, and postoperative atonia of the 
stomach and intestine 
 
 
X-ray investigations of the gut. 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Constipation, diarrhea, dry mouth 
1. Hypersensitivity 
2. Weakness, somnolence, headache, 2. Gastrointestinal bleeding 
depression, akatasia, extrapy- 
3. Bowel occlusion 
ramidal disturbances in children, 
4. Ulcer perforation 
hyperkinesis, a spasm of the face 
5. Abdominal surgeries 
muscles, parkinsonism 
6. Pheochromacytoma 
3. Allergic reaction (skin rash) 
7. Epilepsy 
4. An increase in the toxicity of ethyl 8. Extrapyramidal disorders 
alcohol and neuroleptics. 
9. Pregnancy (during the first trimester) 
10. Childhood 
11. Severe renal and hepatic diseases 
12. Job needed a quick motor reaction. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 

332 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Emetic drugs are the stimulants of CTZ and the vomiting center. 
Ipecacuanna is a reflexly acting agent nowdays applied rarely. Apomorphine is 
centrally acting drug, a D2-dopamine receptor agonist. It is used in acute 
poisonings. These prepara-tions are described in Chapter 4. 
 
Domperidone (Motilium) is a peripherally selective dopamine D2 receptor 
antagonist. The drug is used to relieve nausea and vomiting; to increase the transit 
of food through the stomach by increasing gastrointestinal peristalsis; and to 
promote lactation by release of prolactin. It can be used to relieve gastrointestinal 
symptoms in Parkinson's disease because it blocks peripheral D2 receptors but 
does not cross the blood-brain barrier in normal doses. Side effects include dry 
mouth, abdominal cramps, diarrhea, nausea, rash, and hyperprolactinemia with 
related endocrinal and sexual disturbances. 
 
Ondansetron (Zofran) is a serotonin 5-HT3 receptor antagonist used to prevent 
nausea and vomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or surgery. It 
is also useful in gastroenteritis and treatment of morning sickness and hyperemesis 
gravidarum of pregnancy. The drug is a well-tolerated. Side effects are constipation, 
diarrhea, dizziness, headache, ototoxicity (if injected too quickly), and prolongation of 
the QT interval resulting dangerous heart rhythm disturbances. 
 
Scopolamine is a M-cholinoblocker (see Chapter 6) effective in the 
prophylaxis of motion sickness. The drug should be taken 30 min before the start 
of travel and repeated every 4 to 6 hrs. Scopolamine applied transdermally can 
provide effective protection for up to 3 days. 
 
Diphenhydramine is a H1-histamine receptor antagonist (see Chapter 8) is 
used as an antiemetic to prevent kinetosis, cytotoxic drug-induced, or posoperative 
vomiting, emesis due to radiation sickness. 
 
Phenothiazines (e.g. chlorpromazine) may suppress nausea and vomit that 
follow the surgery or are due to opiod analgesics, gastrointestinal irritation, 
uremia, an elevated intracranial pressure. 
 
DRUGS AFFECTING INTESTINAL MOTILITY 
 
DISTURBANCES OF INTESTINAL MOTILITY 
 
AND THEIR PHARMACOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT 
 
Smooth muscles of the gut are characterized by propulsive wave-like move-ments 
(peristalsis) (fig. 24.12). The activation of intramural mechanoreceptors and some 
humoral agents (cholecystokinin) induce ascending contraction and descending 
relaxation, whereby the intraluminal bolus is moved in the anal direction. 

Chapter 25.  DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 333
 
Activation of opioid receptors in the enteric nerve plexus results in the inhibi-
tion of peristalsis. The stimulation of M-cholinoreceptors also leads to an increase 
in the tone and the motility of the intestine. 
 
Abnormalities of intestinal motility can manifest by constipation, diarrhea, 
and a spasm of smooth muscles (spastic colitis, colic). 
 
The pharmacological management of disturbances of intestinal motility 
includes: 
 
The use of laxatives (purgatives) to treat constipation 
 
 
The use of antidiarrheal drugs (opioids, adsorbents, astringents) to treat 
non-infectious diarrhea 
 
The use of antimicrobial drugs to treat diarrhea caused by infection 
 
 
The apply of cholinoblockers and myotropic spasmolytics to treat spastic-
ity in the gut. 
 
 
Stretch receptors 
 
Contraction 
Relaxation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 24.12. Intestinal peristalsis as a target for drugs regulating motility of the gut (by 
H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Agents increasing intestinal motility (Laxatives and 
purgatives) 1. Bulk laxatives 
 
Osmotic purgatives 
 
–  Magnesium sulfate 
 
–  Sodium sulfate 
 
–  Lactulose 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Bulk-forming agents 
 
–  Laminaria saccharina 
 
–  Methylcellulose 
 
2. Irritant laxatives (purgatives cathartics) 
 
 
Small intestine irritant purgative 
 
–  Castor oil 
 
 
Large bowel irritant purgatives 
 
–  anthraquinone derivatives (preparations from Senna, Frangula, Rheum) 
 
–  synthetic preparations (Bisacodyl, Sodium picasulfate (Guttalax)) 
 
 
Lubricant laxatives 
 
–  Liquid parafin 
 
B. Agents decreasing intestinal motility (Spasmolytics and antidiarrheals) 
 
 
Cholinoblockers 
 
–  Atropine 
 
–  Plathyphylline 
 
– Hexamethonium 
 
 
A myotropic spasmolytics 
 
–  Papaverine 
 
–  Drotaverine 
 
 
An opioid receptor agonist 
 
–  Loperamide (Imodium). 
 
PECULIARITIES OF PREPARATIONS 
 
Laxatives promote and facilitate bowel evacuation by acting locally to stimulate 
intestinal peristalsis or to soften bowel contents. They are described in chapter 4. 
 
Bulk laxatives are divided into osmotic purgatives and hydrophilic colloids 
(bulk gels). Osmotically active laxatives (so-called saline cathartics) elicit bowel 
discharge 1-3 hrs after the administration. They are used to purge the bowel before 
the surgery or to hasten the elimination of ingested poison. Bulk-forming agents 
consist of the indigestible plant cell wall, take up water in the bowel and are used 
for the prophylaxis of constipation. 
 
Irritant laxatives exert an irritant action on the enteric mucosa. According to 
the site of action they are divided into small bowel irritants (castor oil) and large 
bowel irritants (antraquinone derivatives and diphenolmethane derivatives). 
 
The oral administration of 10-30 ml of castor oil is followed within 0,5-3 hrs 
by discharge of watery stool. Because of its massive effect, castor oil is more 
suitable for the treatment of acute constipation or for a rapid elimination of orally 
ingested poison (except lipophilic toxins). 

Chapter 25.  DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 335
 
Antraquinone derivatives are used in the form of galenical preparations and 
produce discharge of soft stool in 6-8 hrs after administration. Synthetic preparations 
also act after a latency of 6-8 hrs. Indications to colon irritant purgatives are chronic 
constipation, the prevention of straining at stool following surgery, myocardial inf-
arction, or stroke, and provision of relief in painful diseases of the anus. They should 
not be given in abdominal complaints of unclear origin. 
 
Lubricant laxatives (liquid paraffin) are non-absorbable and make feces softer 
and more easily passed. They are used for chronic constipation and provision of relief 
in painful diseases of the anus. Liquid paraffin may cause such side-effects as a 
decrease in absorption of fat-soluble vitamins, formation granulomas in enteric lymph 
nodes, lipoid pneumonia (after the aspiration into the bonchial tract). 
 
Antidiarreals. Loperamide is an opioid antidiarrheal of first choice. It is admin-
istered orally; has a half-life of 9-14 hrs; due to high affinity to the intestinal wall and 
intensive first-pass metabolism, does not enter the systemic blood circulation. 
Loperamide binds to opioid receptors in the wall of intestine that results in the inhi-
bition of the release of acetylcholine and prostaglandins. In such a way it decreases 
peristalsis and increases the tone of the anal sphincter. The drug is indicated in acute 
and chronic non-infectious diarrhea. It may cause such side-effects as allergic reac-
tions, weakness, headache, somnolence or insomnia, dry mouth, dyspepsia, nausea, 
vomiting, ileus, meteorism, constipation, megacolon, disturbances of defecation. 
Loperamide must not be applied in infectious diarrhea. 
 
M-cholinoblockers and spasmolytics are used to delay a spasm of intestinal 
musculature and to relieve spasmotic pain in the abdomen. These preparations are 
described in chapters 6, 17, 19. 
 
DRUGS USED IN DISTURBANCES 
 
OF PANCREATIC SECRETION 
 
MAIN PANCREATIC DISORDERS 
 
The pathology of pancreatic gland is displayed as acute or chronic 
pancreatitis. An acute inflammation of the pancreas is accompanied by the 
activation of proteases in gland tissue resulting in autolysis, pancreanecrosis, 
severe pain, and systemic activation of proteolysis and fibrinolysis. 
 
Chronic pancreatitis leads to excretory insufficiency of the pancreas and dis-
ruped digestion of proteins, fats, and carbohydrates (creatorrhea, steatorrhea, etc.). 
 
The pharmacological management of pancreatitis includes: 
 
 
Use of proteolysis inhibitors in acute pancreatitis and pancreonecrosis 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Replacement therapy with combined enzymic preparations in chronic 
pancreatitis. 
  
CLASSIFICATION 
 
1. Drugs used in acute pancreatitis (inhibitors of proteolysis) 
 
–  Aprotinin 
 
–  Contrykal 
 
–  Aminocaproic acid 
 
 Drugs used in chronic pancreatitis (combined enzyme preparations) 
 
–  Pancreatin 
 
–  Mezym forte 
 
–  Festal. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF PREPARATIONS 
 
Inhibitors of pancreatic enzymes are most essential in the treatment of acute 
pancreatitis. Aprotinin and contrykal are directly acting inhibitors of proteolysis 
and fybrinolisis. Aminocaproic acid has a mixed mechanism of action, inhibits 
proteolytic enzymes, excerts anti-allergic and anti-toxic actions. These 
preparations are described in Chapters 22, 28. 
 
Enzyme replacement therapy is used in chronic pancreatitis (see Chapter 28). 
Combined preparations containing protease, amylase, and lipase are suitable in 
this case. With the oral administration of pancreatic enzymes, allowance must be 
made for their partial inactivation by gastric juice. Therefore, they are 
administered in acid-resistant medicinal forms. 
 
DRUGS USED IN HEPATOBILIARY SYSTEM DISORDERS 
 
MAIN HEPATOBILIARY DISORDERS 
 
The main liver functions are detoxication and bile secretion. Liver lesions are 
manifested as acute hepatitis, chronic hepatitis, and cirrhosis. 
 
Cholecystitis and cholelythiasis are also widely spread diseases of 
hepatobiliary system. Following its secretion from the liver into bile, water 
insoluble cholesterol is held in solution in the form of micellar complexes with 
bile acids and phospholipids. When more cholesterol is secreted than can be 
emulsified, it precipitates and form gall stones. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 

Chapter 25.  DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 337
 
 Agents stimulating bile secretion (choleretics) 
 
– Osalmid (Oxaphenamidum 
 
– Cholenzym 
 
– Allochol 
 
 Agents promoting bile release (cholekinetics) 
 
–  Atropine 
 
–  Papaverine 
 
–  Drotaverine 
 
–  Magnesium sulfate 
 
 Gall stone dissolving drugs 
 
–  Chenodeoxycholic acid 
 
–  Ursodeoxycholic acid 
 
 Hepatoprotectors 
 
– Ademetionine (Heptral) 
 
– Thioctic acid (Dialipon, α-lipoic acid) 
 
– Arginine glutamate (Glutargin) 
 
– Silimarin (Darsil) 
 
– Thiatriazolne 
 
– Essentiale. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF PREPARATIONS 
 
Choleretics stimulate the production and secretion of dilute bile fluid. Among 
them there are drugs containing bile or essential bile acids, as well as synthetic 
preparations. Bile containing drugs are Cholenzym and Allochol. 
 
Cholenzym contains dry bile, lyophilized tissues of animals’ pancreas and in-
testine. Due to the presence of bile acids and enzymes, the drug improves 
secretion and motility of the gut. It is indicated in gastritis, achilia, enterocolitis. 
 
Allochol is a combined preparation containing dry bile, dry extracts of 
Allium and Urtica, and activated charcoal. Beside the influence on bile secretion, 
it stimu-lates secretion and motility in the gut, normalized microbial state. The 
drug is used in constipation, dyspepsia. 
 
Osalmid (Oxaphenamidum) is a synthetic preparation with choleretic, spasmo-
lytic, and anti-inflammatory effects. It does not elevate the concentration of chelates, 
bilirubin, and cholesterol in bile. The drug is used in chronic cholecystitis. 
 
Cholekinetics stimulate the gallbladder to contract and empty (e.g. magnesium 
sulfate, cholecystokinin). Some of them decrease spasm of smooth muscles of the 
gallbladder and biliary pathways (atropine, papaverine, drotaverine) and in such a way 
promote the release of bile. Cholekinetics are employed to test the gallbladder 

338 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
function for diagnostic purposes, as well as to treat colic, acute or chronic 
cholecystitis (cholekinetics with a spasmolytic action). 
 
Dissolving of cholesterol-containing gallstones can be achieved by a long-term 
oral administration of chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) or ursodeoxycholic acid 
(UDCA). They are stereoisomeric bile acids presented in a small amount in bile. 
CDCA is absorbed in the small intestine, undergone conjugation in the liver, and 
excreted into the bile that leads to the elevation of bile acids concentration in bile. 
Under such condition the solubility of cholesterol increases and cholesterol-containing 
stones can be dissolved slowly. The daily dose is 8-10 mg, the course of treatment 
 
– 1-2 years. UCDA is more effective and better tolerated than CDCA. Both 
prepara-tions may cause diarrhea, an elevation of liver enzymes in plasma. Stone 
formation may recur after the cessation of a successful therapy. 
 
Hepatoprotectors are preparations protecting hepatocytes from different 
aggres-sive factors. They are divided into plant preparations and drugs containing 
essential phospholipids, amino acid derivatives etc. 
 
Ademetionine (Heptral) is hepatoprotector with antidepressant activity 
described in the Chapter.15. 
Thioctic acid (α-lipoic acid, Dialipin) is an antioxidant. It participates in the oxidative 
decarboxylation of pyruvic acid and alpha-keto acids, helps to reduce blood glucose and 
increase glycogen in the liver, stimulates cholesterol metabolism. The drug improves liver 
function, reduces the damaging effect of the toxins, including alcohol. It has 
hepatoprotective, hypolipidemic, and hypoglycemic action. Indications are liver diseases, 
diabetic and alcoholic polyneuropathy. Side effects include allergic reactions, and 
thrombocytopathy, hemorrhagic rash, thrombophlebitis, increased intracranial pres-sure, 
difficulty breathing, hypoglycemia, convulsions, diplopia with IV administration, 
 
Glutargin is a combination of arginine and glutamic acid, which play an important 
role in the neutralization and excretion of ammonia. Glutargin also has hepatoprotec-tive 
effect due to its antioxidant, antihypoxic and membrane stabilizing properties. In alcoholic 
intoxication the drug stimulates the utilization of alcohol, displays anti-toxic and 
effervescent effects. In the pathology of pregnancy it produces vasodilator and antihypoxic 
effects, reduces the hypoxia of the fetus. Indications are acute and chronic hepatitis, 
poisoning by hepatotropic poisons; hepatic encephalopathy, precoma and coma, 
accompanied by hyperammonemia; acute alcohol poisoning, alcoholic encephalopathy and 
coma; complications in the third trimester of pregnancy . 
 
Thiotriazoline is morpholinium salt of thiazole acid. The pharmacological effect is 
due to anti-ischemic, membrane-stabilizing, antioxidant and immunomodulatory proper-
ties. The drug produces compensatory activation of anaerobic glycolysis and an increase of 
oxidation processes in the Krebs cycle with the preservation of the intracellular ATP 

Chapter 25.  DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 339
 
fund. The presence in the structure of thiol and tertiary nitrogen 
causes the activation of the antioxidant system. Influence of 
thiazole acid leads to inhibition of lipid peroxidation in the 
myocardium, reduction of its sensitivity to catecholamines, sta-
bilization and reduction of necrosis and myocardial ischemia. 
The drug prevents the destruction of hepatocytes, reduces lipid 
infiltration and centrolobular necrosis of the liver, promotes 
reparative regeneration of hepatocytes; increases the rate of 
synthesis and excretion of bile, normalizes its chemical com-
position. Indications to use include hepatitis, cirrhosis of the 
liver, toxic liver lesions, coronary heart disease, side effects of 
some other drugs. 
 
Essentiale is a combined preparation containing es-
sential phospholipids (phosphotidilcholine) and vitamins 
(pyridoxine, cyanocobalamin, nicotinic acid, pantothe-nate). 
Fig. 24.13. Silybum 
mariarum contain-
ing hepatoprotective 
flavonoids. 

It is administered orally or by IV infusion. The drug im-
proves lipid metabolism, protein synthesis, and oxidative 
phosphorilation, inhibits lipids peroxidation, stabilizes cell 
membranes. In such a way, it protects liver tissue against 
hepatotoxic poisons, inhibits hepatic necrosis, promotes the 
restoration of a hepatocytes structure and functions. 
Essentiale is used in acute and chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, 
hepatic coma, fat embolism, poisoning with hepatotoxic 
agents, liver lesions caused by diabetes mellitus, athero- 
 
sclerosis, before and after surgeries in the hepatobiliary system. It has no serious 
side-effects and contraindications. 
 
Silimarin (Darsil) is a plant preparation containing flavonoids from Silybum 
mariarum (fig. 24.13). It demonstrates hepatoprotection grounded on antioxidant, 
membrane-stabilizing, anti-inflammatory effects and is indicated in acute and 
chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, intoxications with hepatotoxic substances. The drug is 
well tolerated. 
 
DRUGS FOR THE TREATMENT OF METEORISM 
 
Meteorism (tympanites, intestinal gas) is a medical condition in which excess 
gas accumulates in the gastrointestinal tract and causes abdominal distension. 
 
SIMETHICONE 

340 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Simethicone is a silicone compound of the group of polydimethylsiloxanes with 
the properties of defoamer. It changes the surface tension of the bubbles of intestinal 
gas, inhibits their formation and promotes their destruction. The gases released in this 
way can be absorbed by the walls of the intestine or removed with peristalsis. During 
Ro-investigation, it prevents the interference and overlapping images; promotes better 
contrast of the mucous membrane of the colon. The drug is not absorbed in the body 
and after passing through the gut is excreted unchanged. Indications are meteorism, 
Remmeld's syndrome, aerophagia, formation of gases in the postoperative period, 
preparation for diagnostic procedures of the abdominal cavity. 
 
Adsorbing drugs (activated charcoal, enterosgel) also can be used in meteor-
ism (see Chapter 3). 
 
PREPARATIONS OF PROBIOTICS 
 
The World Health Organization's definition of probiotics is “live micro-
organisms which, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on 
the host”. Live probiotic cultures are available in fermented dairy products and 
probiotic fortified foods. However, tablets, capsules, powders, and sachets contain-ing 
the bacteria in freeze-dried form are also available: hylak forte (Antidiarrheal 
microorganisms), 
lactobacterin 
(Lactobacillus 
acidophilus), 
bifidumbacterin 
(Bifidobacterium bifidum), linex (Lactic acid producing microorganisms combina-
tion) etc. They are used for antibiotic-associated diarrhea, cholesterol level control, 
gastroenteritis, inflammatory bowel disease in adults, acute diarrhea and rotavirus 
infections in children. The manipulation of the gut microbiota is complex and may 
cause bacteria-host interactions. Some people, such as those with immunodeficiency, 
short bowel syndrome, central venous catheters, cardiac valve disease and premature 
infants, are at higher risk for adverse events. 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Ranitidine inhibits gastric secretion induced by: 
 
 
Histamine 
 
 
Pentagastrin 
 
 
Acetylcholine 
 
 
NSAIDs 
 
 
None of the listed. 
 
№2. The preparation which prevents the activation of proteolytic enzymes in 
the pancreas is: 
 
A. Pancreatin 

Chapter 25.  DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 341
 
 
Festal 
 
 
Aprotinin 
 
 
Omeprazole 
 
 
Atropine. 
 
№3. An ulcer-healing effect of bismuth subcitrate is based on: 
 
 
Acid neutralization 
 
 
An increase in prostaglandin synthesis 
 
 
The irradication of H.pylori 
 
 
The inhibition of proton pump 
 
 
The inhibition of M-cholinoreceptors. 
 
№4. The true statements concerning laxatives and antidiarrheals are: 
 
 
Osmotic laxatives are used to remove the poison from intestine 
 
 
Castor oil is applied for the elimination of lipophilic toxins 
 
 
Antraquinone derivatives act in 6-8 hrs after the administration 
 
 
Loperamide is an antidiarrheal drug of the first choice 
 
 
Lopepamide is M-cholinoblocker. 
 
№5. A patient has duodenal ulcer accompanied by the hypersecretion of 
gastric juice. He is prescribed with a potent inhibitor of gastric secretion 
which belongs to “proton pump” inhibitors. This drug is: 
 
 
Pirenzepine 
 
 
Omeprazole 
 
 
Ranitidine 
 
 
Bisacodyl 
 
 
Metoclopramide. 
 
Answers: 
 
№ 1 – A; № 2 – C; № 3 – B, C; № 4 – A, C, D; № 5 – B. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
25 DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT 
DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON 
THE MYOMETRIUM. DRUGS 
USED TO TREAT ERECTILE 
DYSFUNCTION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEPHRON AND ITS FUNCTION 
 
Urine formation is the function of the kidney. Nephron is the basic structural and 
functional unit of the kidney (fig. 25.1). It includes vascular glomerulus, capsule, 
proximal tubule, loop of Henle, distal tubule, collecting tubule. Its chief function is to 
regulate water and soluble substances by filtering the blood, reabsorbing necessary 
substances and excreting the rest of urine. Nephrons eliminate wastes from the body, 
regulate blood volume and pressure, control levels of electrolytes and metabolites, and 
regulate blood pH. Its functions are vital to life and are regulated by hormones, such as 
antidiuretic hormone, aldosterone, and parathyroid hormone. 
 
The cell of the renal epithelium has apical and basal membranes. 
 
On the apical membrane there is a passive transport of Na+ through pores with the 
participation of permeases. The synthesis of permeases is controlled by aldosterone. 
On the basal membrane there is an active transport of ions by biological 
pumps. Energy for this process is produced by K+/Na+-ATP-ase, succinate 
dehydrohynase. Glucose, amino acids, inorganic phosphate, and some other 
solutes are reabsorbed via secondary active transport through co-transport 
channels driven by the sodium gradient out of the nephron. 

Carbonic anhydrase takes part in the forming of H+ and HCO3-, which are ex-
changed on Na+ on the apical membrane or reabsorbed together with it on the 
basal membrane. 
 
Because of its importance in body fluid regulation, the nephron is a common 
target of drugs that treat high blood pressure and edema. These drugs, called 
diuretics, inhibit the ability of the nephron to retain water, increasing the amount 
of urine produced. 
 
The management of urine formation may be achieved by: 
 
 
Increase of glomerular filtration 
 
 
Decrease of tubular reabsorption (the most preferable way: primarily the 
reabsorption of sodium and chloride is decreased; excretion of water is 
secondary to excretion of salts). 
 
 
Bowman's 
Na+ 
H2O 
Na+ 
H2O 
capsule 
Proximal 
tubule 
Distal 
tubule 
Aldosterone 
Glomerulus 
ADH 
Na+ 
Na+ 
Amino 
H2O 
Glucose 
acids 
Na+ 
Collecting 
Na+ 
H2O 
tubule 
 
 
Loop of Henle 
 
 
Fig. 25.1. Structure and function of nephron (http://www.picsearch.com). 
 
DIURETICS 
 
Diuretics are drugs which increase water and salts excretion from the body 
by a direct action on kidney functions. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 

344 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 Thiazides 
 
–  Hydrochlorothiazide (Dichlothiazide) 
 
–  Indapamide 
 
 Loop diuretics 
 
–  Furosemide (Lasix) 
 
–  Ethacrynic acid 
 
–  Torasemide 
 
 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors 
 
–  Acetazolamide (Diacarbum) 
 
 Potassium-sparing diuretics 
 
–  Spironolactone 
 
–  Triamterene 
 
 Osmotic diuretics 
 
–  Mannitol 
 
–  Urea. 
 
HYDROCHLOROTHIAZIDE 
 
It is a thiazide diuretic (fig. 25.2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 25.2. Chemical structure of hydrochlorothiazide. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally 
 
 
is quickly absorbed in the gut (60-80% of the dose) 
 
 
develops effect in 2 hrs after administration and acts during 12 hrs 
 
 
is excreted with urine in an unchanged state 
 
 
penetrates placental barrier and may be excreted with nursing mother’s milk. 
 
Mechanism of action 

Chapter 25.  DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 345
 
 
Hydrochlorothiazide is secreted into the tubular fluid by proximal tubule cells. 
 
 
In the distal convoluted tubule, it blocks K+/Na+-ATP-ase and succinate 
dehydrohynase and inhibits energetic metabolism (fig. 25.3). 
 
Inhibition of energy production blocks Na+, a Cl- symporter that is associ-
ated with the luminal (basal) membrane. 
 
A decrease in an active transport of Na+ to the blood leads to the 
elevation of Na+ concentration in the cell and inhibition of a passive 
transport of Na+and Cl- through the apical membrane. 
 
Na+, CL-, K+, and water stay in primary urine and are excreted. The result 
is a diuretic action. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 25.3. Mechanism of action of hydrochlorothiazide. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
an enhance in Na+, Cl- excretion (the effect on Na+ is small because most 
of the Na+ has already been absorbed prior to reaching the distal tubule) 
 
an enhance in K+ excretion 
 
 
a reduce in uric acid excretion 
 
 
a decrease in Ca++ excretion, enhance in the excretion of Mg++ 
 
 
an increase of diuresis and a decrease in volume of blood 
 
 
the reduction of peripheral vascular resistance and lowering of BP 
 
 
a decrease in diuresis in patients with diabetes insipidus 

346 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
a decrease in intraocular pressure. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Hypertension 
 
 
Edema caused by CHF or hepatic cirrhosis 
 
 
Treatment with corticosteroids and estrogens 
 
 
Renal disturbances (nephrotic syndrome, acute glomerulonephritis, 
chronic renal failure) 
 
Diadetes insipidus 
 
 
Glaucoma. 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. Electrolyte abnormalities: 
1. Anuria 
volume depletion, hypokalemia, hyponatremia, 
2. Goat 
hypochloremia, hypochloremic alkalosis, hypercal- 3. Hepatic dysfunction 
cemia, and hypomagnesemia 
4. Hypercalcemia 
2. Hyperuricemia 
5. Pancreatitis 
3. Hyperglycemia 
6. Pregnancy. 
 
Increased plasma levels of LDL-cholesterol, 
and triglycerides 
 
Sexual dysfunction (impotence) 
 
 
Heart arrhythmias due to hypokalemia 
 
 
Worsening of renal and hepatic insufficiency 
 
 
A variety of drug interactions: a decrease in the 
efficacy of anticoagulants and uricosurics; an 
increase in the toxicity of cardiac glycosides and 
anti-arrhythmic drugs. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER DIURETICS 
 
FUROSEMIDE 
 
 
is a loop diuretic, or high ceilling diuretic 
 
 
is administered IM, IV, orally; after IV injection, starts to act in 5-10 min, 
develops a maximal effect in 20-60 min and acts during 1,5-3 hrs; after the 
oral administration starts to act in 30-60 min and acts during 4-6 hrs; has 
bioavailability of 50-70%; binds to plasma proteins (95-99%); is metabolized 
in the liver by conjugation with glucuronic acid; has T½ = 0,5-1,5 hrs; is 

Chapter 25.  DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 347
 
excreted with urine; is active under the conditions of acidosis, as well as 
under the conditions of alkalosis 
 
 
has the mechanism of action similar to the mechanism of thiazides, but the 
site of action is a thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle (fig. 25.4). This 
limb has a high reabsorptive capacity and is responsible for the reabsorbing 
25% of the filtered load of Na+. The loop diuretics act by blocking of Na+, K+, 
a Cl- symporter. Because of the large absorptive capacity and the amount of 
 
Na+ delivered to the ascending limb, loop diuretics have a profound 
diuretic action. Excretion of Cl- is greater than Na+ one; large doses 
promote ureic acid excretion. The osmotic gradient for water reabsorption 
is also reduced, resulting in increased water excretion. The reduction in 
the cellular K+ also results in a loss of Ca++ and Mg++. 
 
 
displays a potent and quick diuretic action with a significant increase in 
 
Na+,K+ and Cl- excretion; maintains the renal blood flow and does not 
inhibit glomerular filtration 
 
 
is indicated in edema of the lungs, edema of the brain, forced diuresis in 
acute poisonings, hypertensive emergency, acute glaucoma, chronic 
edemas associated with CHF, cirrhosis, renal diseases, hypercalcemia 
 
 
may cause side-effects, such as hypokalemia, disturbances in electrolytes 
balance and renal ureac acid secretion, hypotension, vertigo, collapse, ar-
rhythmia, thrombotic complications, dry mouth, nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, pancreatitis, weakness, skin rash, ototoxicity, rarely aplastic 
anemia, leu-copenia, hematuria 
 
 
is contraindicated in acute glomerulonephritis, acute renal failure, anuria, 
obturation of urinary pathways, hepatic coma, pancreatitis, disturbances 
in electrolyte balance, gout, diabetes mellitus, hypotension, lupus 
erhythema-tosus, first half of pregnancy, lactation. 
 
ETHACRYNIC ACID 
 
 
is a loop diuretic 
 
 
is administered orally and IV; after the oral administration, starts to act in 
 
30-60 min, develops maximal effect in 2 hrs, and acts during 6-9 hrs; after IV 
injection, begins to act quickly and is suitable for emergency help 
 
has the mechanism of action and pharmacodynamics similar to that of 
furosemide, but does not increase bicarbonate excretion 
 
 
is indicated similar by furosemide, is effective in the treatment of 
bromides accumulation in the body 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
has no significant influence on the electrolytes balance in blood , but is toler-
ated worse than furosemide, especially in patients with renal insufficiency. 
  
TORASEMIDE 
 
 
is loop diuretic 
 
 
is mainly used in the management of edema associated with CHF; is also 
used at low doses for the management of hypertension 
 
compared with other loop diuretics, torasemide has a more prolonged 
diu-retic effect than equipotent doses of furosemide and relatively 
decreased potassium loss; does noti induce ototoxicity . 
 
INDAPAMIDE 
 
 
is a thiazide-like diuretic 
 
 
is used in hypertension and edema due to CHF 
 
 
side effects are are hypokalemia, fatigue, orthostatic hypotension and al-
lergic reactions. 
 
ACETAZOLAMIDE 
 
 
is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor with a sulfonamide structure 
 
 
is the prototype for this class of drugs 
 
 
has the mechanism of action connected with changes in the reabsorption of 
HCO3-. HCO3- is reabsorbed in the proximal tubule and requires the activity 
of carbonic anhydrase. HCO3- reabsorption takes place in a circuitous way. 
 
Intracellularly carbonic anhydrase converts H2O and CO2 to the carbonic 
acid (H2CO3). H2CO3 dissociates into H+ and HCO3-. The HCO3- is 
transported across the basal membrane. H+ is secreted into the tubular 
lumen in exchange for Na+. The H+ combines with a filtered HCO3- to 
form H2CO3 which immediately dissociates into H2O and CO2, that is 
reabsorbed. Therefore, filtered bicarbonate is reabsorbed for every H+ 
secreted. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, by blocking the enzyme, prevent 
the reabsorption of NaHCO3-, and hence diuresis occurs (fig. 25.5) 
 
 
produces a HCO3- loss; increases Na+ and K+ excretion; decreases the 
renal blood flow; lowers intraocular pressure and intracranial pressure 
due to the inhibition of carbonic anhydrase in these tissues 
 
 
is not used for its diuretic properties; is used to reduce intraocular 
pressure in glaucoma, to treat epilepsy, altitude and motion sickness 

Chapter 25.  DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 
349
 
 
 
 
Fig. 25.4. Mechanism of action of furosemide. 
 
 
may cause side-effects, such as metabolic acidosis, sedation, and 
paresthe-sia; because of the structural similarity to sulfonamides, 
acetazolamide can cause bone marrow depression and allergic reactions. 
 
SPIRONOLACTONE 
 
 
is a potassium-sparring diuretic 
 
 
is taken orally; is metabolized to canrenone which is the active drug mol-
ecule; develops therapeutic effect in 2-5 days 
 
is a competitive antagonist of aldosterone in gene expression, inhibits 
synthesis of permeases that results in the inhibition of a passive transport 
of Na+ through the apical membrane in collecting tubules; does not act on 
the excretion of K+; the diuretic and natriuretic effects of spironolactone 
are modest (fig. 25.6) 
 
 
is used as an adjunct to other diuretics to reduce a loss of K+; in 
hyperaldo-steronism, CHF refractory to cardiac glycosides, myastenia 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
may cause hyperkalemia, GI disturbances, diarrhea, somnolence, distur-
bances in the menstrual function in women, ginecomastia and impotence 
in men (due to anti-androgenic activity). 
  
TRIAMTERENE 
 
 
is potassium-sparring diuretic 
 
 
is taken orally, has a weak slow action 
 
 
by its chemical structure, is similar to hydrotating Na+ and closes Na+ 
pores in the apical membrane of cells in collecting tubules (is a Na+ 
channel in-hibitor); increases excretion of Na+ and water; reduces K+ loss 
(fig.25.6); is used together with other diuretics for the treatment of 
hypotension (This enhances the effects of the more potent diuretics and 
counteracts the K+ loss seen with these diuretics) 
 
 
may cause hyperkalemia, nausea, vomiting, dizziness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 25.5. Mechanism of action of acetazolamide: CA – carbonic anhydrase. 

Chapter 25.  DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 351
 
OSMOTIC DIURETICS 
 
 
are represented by mannitol and urea 
 
 
are administered by IV infusion 
 
 
have the mechanism of action connected with an increase of the osmolar-ity 
of blood, the extraction of H2O from systemic body compartments, an 
increase of the extracellular fluid volume and the renal blood flow. Osmotic 
diuretics are filtrated at the glomerulus, but are poorly reabsorbed, as a re-
sult, they increase the osmolarity of primary urine. These agents bind water 
osmotically and retain it in the tubular lumen. When Na+ is taken up into the 
tubule cell, H2O cannot follow in a usual amount. The fall in the urine Na+ 
concentration reduces the Na+ reabsorption in the proximal tubules. 
 
The result is a large volume of dilute urine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 25.6. Chemical structure and mechanism of action of 
potassium-sparring diuretics (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
are used for edema of the brain (especially, mannitol), edema of the 
lungs, forced diuresis in acute poisonings, oliguria, anuria, the 
prophylaxis of acute renal failure in such situations as cardiovascular 
surgeries, traumatic shock, hemolytic transfusion reactions 
 
 
may cause headache, nausea, vomiting, chest pain, an increase in blood 
volume resulting in heart decompensation, hyponatremia. 
  
MEDICINAL PLANTS AND PLANT PREPARATIONS WITH 
DIURETIC PROPERTIES 
 
 
medicinal plants with diuretic propertiies are Equisetum (the herb) and 
Orthosiphonum (leaves) (fig.25.7) 
 
 
are taken orally as infusions 
 
 
increase the excretion of water with a minimal action on the electrolyte 
balance, have an antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory action 
 
are used for the treatment of renal diseases, diseases of urinary pathways, 
and chronic edemas 
 
have no significant side-effects 
 
 
plant preparation Lespenephryl contains biologically active substances from 
 
Lepidum capitatum. Pharmacological action is diuretic and antiazotemic. The 
drug promotes increased renal filtration, reduces azotemia, increases the 
excretion of nitrogenous metabolites.It is used for latent and compensated 
stages of chronic renal failure without significant side effects. 
 
DRUGS USED IN TREATMENT OF GOUT 
 
GOUT AND PRINCIPLES OF ITS THERAPY 
 
Gout is a metabolic disease that results from hyperuricemia, an elevation in 
the blood of the uric acid, the end product of purine degradation. The typical gout 
attack consists of a highly painful inflammation of the first metatarsophalangeal 
joint. Gout attacks are triggered by the precipitation of sodium urate crtystals in 
the synovial fluid of joints. 
 
The pharmacological management of gout includes: 
 
 
treatment of the gout attack with colchicine, indomethacin, 
phenylbutazone, glucocorticoids 
 
prophylaxis of gout attacks with the diet low in purines, uricostatics, uri-
cosurics. 

Chapter 25.  DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 353
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Uricostatics (They decrease urate production) 
 
–  Allopurinol 
 
B. Uricosurics (They promote renal excretion of uric acid) 
 
 
Drugs inhibiting reabsorption of ureic acid 
 
–  Probenecid 
 
–  Etebenecid 
 
 
Drugs increasing the solubility of urates 
 
–  Urodanum 
 
 
Drugs decreasing forming of urate concrements 
 
–  Urolesanum. 
 
ALLOPURINOL 
 
 
is hypoxantine (purine) on chemical structure 
 
 
is taken orally; is transformed into the active metabolite alloxantine (oxy-
purinol) 
 
 
 
A 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 25.7. Medicinal plants with diuretic action: 
 
A – Equisetum; B – Orthosiphonum. 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
inhibits xanthine oxidase and in such a way decreases the synthesis of the 
uric acid, prevents uricosemia, inhibits the development of gout 
 
is used for the prophylaxis a gout attack and urolythiasis 
 
 
is well tolerated, rarely may cause skin reactions. 
 
 
PECUILIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Probenecid is taken orally, saturates the organic acid transport system in the 
proximal renal tubules, makes it unavailable for urate reabsorbion; is 
contraindicated in patients with urate stones in the urinary tract. 
 
Etebenecid is a synthetic preparation which blocks an active reabsorption of 
the uric acid in the proximal tubules and is used for the treatment of chronic gout. 
 
Urodanum is a combined preparation in granules for the oral administration; 
contains substances binding to urates and increasing their solubility. 
 
Urolesanum is a combined preparation with plant ingredients; decreases 
form-ing of urite concrements in the kidneys. 
 
 
DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 
 
UTERUS CONTRACTIONS AND THEIR 
 
PHARMACOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT 
 
Uterus is a muscular organ of the reproductive system capable to contrac-
tions. Towards the end of pregnancy uterine contractions increase in the force and 
frequency and become fully coordinated in labor. Uterine motility is controlled by 
the autonomic nervous system and hormones. The stimulation of α-adrenoceptors 
results in an increase of uterus contractility, the stimulation of β-adrenoceptors 
leads to the relaxation of the uterus. The important factors of humoral regulation 
of contractile myometrium function are pituitary hormones, sex hormones, and Pg. 
A pituitary hormone oxytocin stimulates uterus contractions on the ground of the 
increased level of estrogens. 
 
The management of myometrium contractility includes: 
 
 
the stimulation of rhythmic contractions during labor 
 
 
an increase in uterine tone for the arrest and prevention of postpartum 
uterine bleeding 
 
a decrease in the tone of the myometrium to prevent premature labor or 
spontaneous abortion 

Chapter 25.  DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 355
 
 
a decrease in the uterine cervix tone during labor. 
 
DRUGS ACTING ON UTERUS CONTRACTILITY 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Drugs stimulating myometrium 
 
 Stimulants of rhythmic 
contractions a) prostaglandins 
– Dinopros 
 
– Dinoprostone 
 
 
hormones 
 
– Oxytocin 
 
– Estron 
 
– Estradiol dipropionate 
 
 other preparations 
 
– Neostigmine 
 
– Castor oil 
 
– Calcium chloride 
 
 Stimulants of uterine tone 
 
 ergot alkaloids 
 
– Ergometrine maleate 
 
 
agonists of oxytocin receptors 
 
– Carbetocin (Pabal) 
 
 
Uterine relaxants (Tokolytics) 
 
 β-adenomimetcs 
 
– Partusisten 
 
– Hexaprenaline (Gynipral) 
 
 Antagonists of oxytocin receptors 
 
– Atosiban (Tractocile) 
 
 Other preparations 
 
– Magnesium sulfate 
 
– Nifedipine 
 
– Aspirin 
 
– Progesterone, 
 
– Tocopherol acetate 
 
C. Drugs decreasing uterine cervix tone 
 
– Atropine sulfate 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
– Magnesium sulfate 
 
– Drotaverine 
 
– Lydasum. 
 
 
OXYTOCIN 
 
 
is octapeptide, hormone of posterior pituitary (fig. 25.8) 
 
 
is administered IM, IV, into the wall of uterus, intranasally; starts to act in 
 
½ – 1 min after IV administration 
 
 
acts on oxytocin receptors on the cell membranes in the myometrium, causes 
the depolarization of membranes and an influx of calcium, increases 
excitability, stimulates rhythmic contractions of the myometrium, promotes 
labor activity; also stimulates milk production and ejection 
 
is used for the stimulation of labor activity, the treatment of postpartum 
uterine bleeding, the stimulation of lactation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Axons 
Posterior lobe 
Granules 
containing 
Anterior 
hormone 
lobe 
Hormones 
Oxytocin 
 
 
 
 
Uterus 
 
 
Fig. 25.8. Oxytocin as hormone of posterior pituitary (http://www.picsearch.com). 

Chapter 25.  DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 357
 
 
may cause nausea, vomiting, heart arrhythmia in the fetus, urine retention, 
the elevation of BP, a thetanic contraction of myometrium, the hyperstimula-
tion of labor activity resulting in the fetus hypoxia and a rupture of the uterus 
 
is contraindicated in danger of a uterus rupture, hypoxia of the fetus, ab-
normal position of the fetus. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Dinoprost (PgF2α) is administered IV, intravaginally, intra-amnionally; acts 
on specific structures in the myometrium, increases the sensitivity to oxytocin, 
produces the stimulation of rhythmic contractions of the myometrium in any terms 
of pregnancy, relaxes the cervix of the uterus; is used for the stimulation of labor 
and initiation of artificial abortion; may cause side-effects, such as nausea, vomit-
ing, diarrhea, tachycardia, a spasm of bronchi, an increase in BP and an elevation 
of intraocular pressure; is contraindicated in patients with 
 
scars of the uterus, severe diseases of the cardio-vascular 
system, liver, and kidney; bronchial asthma, glaucoma. 
 
Dinoprostone (PgE2) is similar to dinoprost, but 
may be taken orally; does not cause spasm of smooth 
muscles and an increase in BP. 
 
Ergometrine maleate is an ergot alkaloid (fig. 25.9); is 
taken orally or administered IM, IV; increases the uterus 
tone and terminates postpartum bleeding caused by a low 
tone of the myometrium; realizes its effect through α1-
adrenoceptors and serotonin (5-HT) receptors; is used for 
the treatment of postpartum bleeding and slow postpartum 
involution of the uterus; is not used for the stimulation of 
labor; should not be used before the birth of placenta; is 
toxic; may cause acute and chronic poisoning (ergotismus) 
connected with vasoconstriction, trophy disturbances, and 
psychic disorders. 
 
Carbetocin (Pabal) is an eight amino acid long analo-
gueue of oxytocin and has a similar mechanism of action. It 
can be administered intravenously or intramuscularly. 
Contractile effects of the uterus are apparent within 2 min 
and can be observed for 1 hr. The drug has a much longer 
lasting effect than oxytocin. Carbetocin functions as an 
agonist at peripheral oxytocin receptors, particularly in the 
myometrium, with lesser affinity for myopepithelial cells. 
 
Fig. 25.9. Ergot 
(Secale cornutum) 
containing 
ergometrine. 

358 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
It has been approved for use immediately following an elective cesarean section to 
restore uterine tone and prevent hemorrhage. Side effects are nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal pain, itching skin, increased body temperature, trembling and 
weakness, back and chest pain, dizziness, anemia, chills and sweating, metallic 
taste, tachycardia and respiratory distress. 
 
Atosiban (Tractocile) is is a competitive antagonist of oxytocin receptors. It is 
used as an IV medication as labor repressant to halt premature labor. The drug 
antagonises uterine contractions and induces uterine quiescence. The onset of uterus 
relaxation following atosiban is rapid, uterine contractions being significantly reduced 
within 10 min. Atosiban is indicated to delay imminent pre-term birth in pregnant adult 
women. It is useful in improving the pregnancy outcome of in vitro fertilization-
embryo transfer in patients with repeated implantation failure. 
 
Hexoprenaline (Gynipral) is selective β2-adrenergic receptor agonist used in the 
treatment of asthma and as tocolytic agent. It is administered for acute tocolysis (rapid 
suppression of labor in the case of acute intrauterine asphyxia of the fetus; before the 
manual rotation of the fetus from transverse position; in the complicated labor activity 
or before caesarean section); massive tocolysis (inhibition of premature labor with 
flattened cervix of the uterus); prolonged tocolysis (the risk of premature birth, uterine 
contractions without shortening and widening of the cervix). Possible side effects 
include headaches, anxiety, tremor, sweating, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, intestinal 
atony, increased activity of liver transaminases, tachycardia, lowering of BP; 
ventricular extrasystole, cardialgia; hyperglycemia, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia at the 
beginning of therapy. In newborns the drug may cause hypoglycemia and acidosis, 
bronchospasm, anaphylactic shock. 
 
Many other drugs which are used as uterotonics and uterus relaxants belong to 
different pharmacological groups and are described between autonomics, hormonal 
preparations, spasmolytics, etc. in Сhapters 5, 6, 7, 17, 19, 26, 27. 
 
DRUGS USED TO TREAT ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION 
 
Erectile dysfunction is the inability to maintain penile erection for the successful 
performance of sexual activity. It is due to many physical and psychological causes: 
vascular disease, diabetes, drugs side-effects, depression, prostatic surgery. 
 
Sexual stimulation results in smooth muscle relaxation of the corpus cavernosum, 
increasing the inflow of blood. The mediator of this response is nitric oxide (NO). NO 
activates guanylyl cyclase, which forms cGMP and produces smooth muscle relaxation 
through a reduction in the Ca++ concentration. The duration of action of cyclic 
nucleotides in the corpus cavernosum is controlled by the action of PDE-5. 

Chapter 25.  DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 359
 
Phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE-5) inhibitors (sildenafil, vardenafil, and tadalafil) 
are now the first-line therapy for men with erectile dysfunction. 
 
Sildenafil, vardenafil, and tadalafil inhibit PDE-5, the isozyme responsible 
for degradation of cGMP in the corpus cavernosum. The action of PDE-5 
inhibitors is to increase the flow of blood into the corpus cavernosum at any given 
level of sexual stimulation. At recommended doses, they have no effect in the 
absence of sexual stimulation. PDE-5 inhibitors are indicated for the treatment of 
erectile dysfynction of organic or psychogenic origin. 
 
Sildenafil and vardenafil should be taken 1 hr prior to anticipated sexual 
activity with erectile enhancement observed up to 4 hrs after administration. 
Tadalafil has a slower onset of action, but longer half-life, resulting in enhanced 
erectile function for at least 36 hours. 
 
Side-effects of PDE-5 are headache, flushing, dyspepsia, and nasal 
congestion. Disturbances in color vision (loss of blue/green discrimination) occur 
with sildenafil. PDE-5 inhibitors should not be used more than once per day. PDE-
5 inhibitors miust be used with caution in patients with a history of cardiovascular 
diseases. Because of the ability to potentiate the activity of NO, these agents are 
contraindicated to patients taking preparations of organic nitrates. 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. A loop diuretic for forced diuresis in acute poisoning is: 
 
 
Hydrochlorothiazide 
 
 
Spironolactone 
 
 
Ergometrine maleate 
 
 
Furosemide 
 
 
Triamterene. 
 
№2. All the concerning dinopost and dinoprostone is true, except: 
 
 
They are prostaglandins 
 
 
They stimulate uterus contractions 
 
 
They are effective only at the end of pregnancy 
 
 
They relax the uterine cervix 
 
 
They are used for the stimulation of labor and induction of abortion. 
 
№3. Osmotic diuretics: 
 
 
Are administered by IV infusion 
 
 
Cause dehydratation of body tissues 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Block carbonic anhydrase in the proximal tubules 
 
 
Reduce Na+ reabsorption in the proximal tubules 
 
 
Has a weak diuretic action. 
 
 
№4. The correct statements concerning treatment of gout are: 
 
 
Colchicine is used to treat a gout attack 
 
 
Allopurinol is a uricosuric agent 
 
 
Allopurinol is the inhibitor of xantine oxidase 
 
 
Probenecid is uricostatic 
 
 
Uricostatics are used for the prevention of a gout attack. 
 
№5. A patient has chronic cardiac insufficiency and essential hypertension. 
The doctor advices him to include into the treatment regimen a 
potassium-sparing diuretic. The drug is an antagonist of aldosterone, but 
its therapeutic effect develops slowly. Which of the listed drugs is 
recommended to the patient? 
 
 
Furosemide 
 
 
Amiloride 
 
 
Spironolactone 
 
 
Mannitol 
 
 
Urea. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – D; № 2 – C; №3 – A, B, D; № 4 – A, C, E; № 5 – C. 

Chapter 25.  DIURETICS. ANTI-GOAT DRUGS. DRUGS ACTING ON THE MYOMETRIUM 361
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 26 HORMONAL 
PREPARATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HORMONES AND HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
 
Hormones are substances produced by endocrinal glands into blood which 
achieve humoral regulation of body functions. 
 
Hormonal preparations are medicinal forms of hormones used for treatment 
of diseases. 
 
Anti-hormones are drugs which decrease effects of hormones by the 
inhibition of their secretion or binding to hormonal receptors. 
Hormonal drugs are divided into several groups by their origin and clinical 
properties (fig. 26.1). They may be classified according to the mode of action and 
chemical structure. 
 
Classification of hormones according to the 
mode of action 
 
A. Kinetic hormones (oxytocin, vasopressin) 
 
B. Morphogenous hormones (somatotropin, thyroid hormones) 
 
 
Metabolic hormones 

 
Anabolic (androgens, insulin) 
 
 
Catabolic (epinephrine, glucocorticoids). 
 
Classification of hormones according to the chemical structure 
 
 
Amino acids derivatives (e.g., epinephrine, L-thyroxine, Triiodthyronine 
hydro-chloride) 
 
 
Peptides (e.g., Corticotropin, Somatotropin, Menopaustic gonadotropin, Chorionic 
gonadotropin, Oxytocin, Adiurecrin, Calcitonin, Parathyroidin, Insulin) 
 
Steroids 
 
 
Glucocorticoides (e.g., Hydrocortisone acetate, Prednisolone, Dexamethasone, 
 
Triamcinolone, Flumetasone pivalate) 
 
 
Mineralcorticoides (e.g., Desoxycorticosterone acetate (DOCSA) 
 
 
Estrogens (e.g., Estron, Estradiol benzoate, Ethinylestradiol) 
 
 
Progestins (e.g., Progesterone) 
 
 
Androgens (e.g., Testosterone propionate) 
 
 
Anabolic steroids (e.g., Methandienone, Nandrolone phenylpropionate, 
Nandrolone decanoate). 
 
Common mechanisms of action 
 
Hormones exert their effects through different mechanisms: 
 
 
by binding to the cell surface receptors (oxytocin, vasopressin, corticotro-pin, 
insulin, etc.). Hormones acting on the cell membrane receptors realize their 
effects by the alteration of the intracellular cAMP (e.g. hypothalamic and 
anterior pituitary hormones), by Ca++and the generation of inositol-phospate 
/ diacilglycerol (e.g. posterior pituitary hormones), or by a direct 
transmembrane activation of tyrosine kinase (e.g. insulin) 
 
by binding to intracellular cytoplasmic receptors (glucocorticoids, 
mineral- corticoids, estrogens, progestins, androgens) 
 
by interaction with nuclear receptors (thyroxine, triiodthyronine). 
 
The Hormone’s level in the blood is regulated according to the principle of 
“back-cross” (fig. 26.2). 
 
Types of hormonal therapy 
 
Hormonal therapy is the therapy by hormonal preparations. 
 
There are such types of hormonal therapy: 
 
 
Replacement therapy, which is the use of hormonal drugs for the 
hypofunc-tion of the endocrinal gland (e.g. insulin for diabetes mellitus) 
 
Patogenesis therapy, which is the use of hormonal preparations for 
diseases unconnected with hormones deficit (e.g. insulin for cachexia) 
 
Pharmacodynamic therapy is the usage of non-hormonal properties of 
hormones (e.g. steroid Viadrilum for IV anesthesia) 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
363
 
 
HORMONAL DRUGS 
 
Hypothalamic and pituitary hormones 
 
Thyroid hormones and anti-thyroid drugs 
 
Parathyroid hormone preparations 
 
Anti-diabetic drugs 
 
Corticosteroids 
 
Gonadal hormones and related substances 
 
Fig. 26.1. Main groups of hormonal preparations. 
 
 
Stimulation therapy is the usage of hormones of the anterior pituitary for 
the stimulation of peripheral glands (e.g. corticotropin after the 
withdrawal of corticosteroids). 
 
Antihormonal therapy is the usage of anti-hormones (e.g. methimazole 
for hyperthyroidism). 
 
Principles of hormonal therapy 
 
 
An individual selection of the dose for each patient (e.g. 1IU of insulin 
for utilization of 3-5g of sugar excreted with urine per day) 
 
 
Taking into account of biological rhythms (e.g. glucocorticoids are more 
effective in the morning when it’s their peak concentration in the organism) 
 
 
A long-term treatment, sometimes during the whole life (e.g. insulin for 
type 1 diabetes mellitus) 
 
 
Gradual abolishing 
 
 
Stimulation therapy at the end of treatment (e.g. corticotropin before the 
abolishing of glucocorticoids (fig. 26.2). 
 
HYPOTHALAMIC HORMONES 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 Gonadorelin analogues 
 
– Buserelin 
 
– Triptorelin 
 
 Prothyrelin analogues 
 
– Prothyrelin 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 Somatostatin analogues 
 
– Ocreotide 
 
– Lanreotide. 
 
 
PECULIARITIES OF PREPARATIONS 
 
Buserelin is a synthetic analogue of gonadotropin-releasing hormone ago-nist 
(GnRH), a nonapeptide. It is administered intranasally and by injection. The half-life is 
72-80 min. It is an agonist of the GnRH receptor with high potency for induction of 
luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) which activate 
gonadal hormone production, stimulate spermatogenesis in men and induce ovulation 
in women. With chronic administration of buserelin, the GnRH receptor becomes 
desensitized, that results in a loss of LH and FSH secretion and a decrease of gonadal 
hormones production, diminished spermatogenesis in men, and anovulation in women. 
The drug in is used in the treatment of hormone-responsive 
 
 
A 
Hypothalamus 
B 
 
CRH 
 
 
Hypo- 
 
physis 
 
ACTH 
 
 
 
Adrenal 
 
cortex 
 
 
 
Cortisol 
Exogenous 
 
30 mg/day 
administration 
 
Fig. 26.2. Back-cross regulation of cortisol production: 
 
A – cortisol production under normal condition; B – a decrease in cortisol 
production with a cortisol dose < daily production (adapted by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
365
 
cancers (prostate cancer and premenopausal breast cancer), endometriosis, uterine 
fibroids, precocious puberty, as a component of transgender hormone therapy, and 
in assisted reproduction. During the initial phase of the therapy, transient 
activation of the tumor is possible. Side effects that occur later during the 
treatment are mainly due to low sex hormone levels. 
 
Triptorelin is a decapeptide, GnRH agonist. It is administered SC, IM, may 
be used as depo-preparation; is eliminated 3 times slower than the natural GnRH. 
Pharmacodynamics is similar to the same of buserelin. The inhibitory effect is de-
veloped 3-4 weeks after the start of treatment and is reversible. Indications and 
side effects are similar to those of buserelin. 
 
Protirelin is a tripeptide, synthetic analogue of thyrotropin-releasing 
hormone (TRH). It promotes the release of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 
and increases the concentration of prolactin. T1/2 is short (5 min). It is used in the 
diagnosis of pituitary insufficiency in patients with hypothyroid conditions and in 
women with hypo- and agalactia. Side effects are fluctuations in BP, headache, 
photophobia, anxiety, sweating, abdominal pain, xerostomia, allergic reactions. 
 
Octreotide (Sandostatin) is an octapeptide that mimics natural somatostatin. It is 
administered SC and IV and has half-life to 100 min. The drug inhibits secretion of 
many hormones, such as gastrin, cholecystokinin, glucagon, growth hormone, insulin, 
secretin, pancreatic polypeptide, TSH, and vasoactive intestinal peptide, reduces 
secretion of fluids by the intestine and pancreas, decreases GI motility and inhibits 
contraction of the gallbladder, inhibits the action of certain anterior pituitary 
hormones, causes vasoconstriction, and reduces portal vessel pressures in bleeding 
varices. The drug is more potent inhibitor of growth hormone, glucagon, and insu-lin 
than natural hormone. Octreotide is used for the treatment of growth hormone 
producing tumors of pituitary gland, diarrhea associated with carcinoid syndrome, and 
acromegaly. It is given for management of acute hemorrhage from esophageal varices; 
labeled by radioactive isotopes, is used in nuclear medicine for imaging and treatment 
of neuroendocrine tumours. The most frequent side effects are headache, 
hypothyroidism, cardiac conduction changes, GI reactions, gallstones, hyper- or 
hypoglycemia, and injection site reactions. 
 
Lanreotide is a synthetic analogue of somatostatin which blocks the release 
of several other hormones including growth hormone, TSH, insulin and glucagon. 
Lanreotide binds to the same receptors as somatostatin, although with higher affin-
ity to peripheral receptors, and has similar activity. It has much longer half-life 
and produces prolonged effects. The drug is used in the management of 
acromegaly and symptoms caused by neuroendocrine tumors. Side effects are pain 
at the injection site and GI disturbances. 

366 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
PITUITARY HORMONES 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
1. Anterior pituitary hormones and related substances 
 
–  Corticotropin 
 
–  Somatotropin 
 
–  Human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG) (Menotropin) 
 
–  Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) 
 
–  Follitropin alpha 
 
–  Follitropin beta 
 
 Posterior pituitary hormones and related substances 
 
– Oxytocin 
 
– Desaminoxytocyn 
 
– Vasopressin 
 
– Desmopressin 
 
– Terlipressin 
 
 Antagonists of pituitary hormones (antigonadotropins) 
 
– Danazol 
 
PECULIARITIES OF PREPARATIONS 
 
Corticotropin is a short peptide; stimulates the secretion of corticosteroids by 
the cortex of the adrenal glands; has anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic effects 
resulting from an increase in cortisol secretion; is administered IM to treat the 
hypofunction of the adrenal cortex, adrenocortical atrophy after the withdrawal of 
corticosteroids, rheumatism, collagenosis, bronchial asthma, and severe allergy, 
displays side-effects which are similar to adverse reactions of corticosteroids. 
 
Somatotropin is a large polypeptide from the anterior pituitary; is produced by the 
recombinant DNA technology; stimulates protein synthesis and promotes bone growth; is 
used to treat growth-hormone insufficiency in children, pituitary dwarfness; is con-
traindicated to patients with closed epiphyses or with an increased intracranial mass. 
 
Human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG) ), or Menotropin and human cho-
rionic gonadotropin (hCG) regulate reproduction. hMG contains follicle-stimulating 
hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), causes ovarian follicular growth and 
maturation. hCG is a placental hormone and LH agonist promoting ovulation. In men 
treatment with hCG causes external sexual maturation, and treatment with 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
367
 
hMG stimulates spermatogenesis. Gonadotropins are used in hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism, delayed puberty, ovulation dysfunction and sterility in women, 
hypospermia and sterility in men as well as in the methods of assisted reproduction. 
 
Folitropin alfa is a follicle-stimulating drug obtained by genetic engineering. It 
binds to receptors in target cells, increases the level of estrogens and proliferation of 
the endometrium, stimulates the development of follicles and ovulation, promotes the 
development of multiple follicles. Indications include infertility in women due to 
hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction, accompanied by oligo- or amenorrhea. and stimu-
lation of hyperovulation. The drug may cause ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. 
 
Follitropin beta is a recombinant FSH. Compensating the deficiency of this 
hormone, it regulates the normal growth and maturation of the follicles, the 
synthesis of sex hormones. By specific activity, it exceeds FSH, extracted from the 
urine of women during the postmenopause. Indications are female infertility in 
anovulation; carrying out programs of assisted reproduction, including in vitro 
fertilization (for induction of superovulation), 
 
Danazol is a synthetic androgen derived from etisterone. It has a reversible 
anti-gonadotropic effect by inhibiting the release of GnRH, or suppressing the 
production of pituitary gland FSH and LH in men and women. Danazol can 
directly suppress steroidogenesis, interacts with androgenic, progesterone and 
glucocorticoid recep-tors in target tissues, binds to steroid-binding globulin. The 
drug is characterized as a weak androgen and anabolic, a weak progestogen, and a 
functional antiestrogen. It has the immunosuppressive effect; decreases the pain 
syndrome and causes the recession of endometriotic foci in the patients with 
endometriosis. The drug is used primarily in the treatment of endometriosis, also 
can be used for management of menorrhagia, fibrocystic breast disease, immune 
thrombocytopenic purpura, pre-menstrual syndrome, breast pain, and hereditary 
angioedema. The use of danazol is limited by masculinizing side effects. 
 
Oxytocin stimulates uterus contractions and promotes contractions of 
myoepithe-lial cells in mammary glands; is used in weak labor activity, hypotonic 
metrorrhagia, for the promotion of milk ejection; is contraindicated in abnormal 
fetal presentation, fetal distress, and the risk of uterine rupture development. 
 
Demoxytocin (Desaminooxytocin) is a synthetic analogue of oxytocin and 
has similar activities, but is more potent and has longer half-life. Unlike oxytocin, 
demoxytocin is administered as buccal tablets. It is used to induce labor, promote 
lactation, and to prevent and treat postpartum mastitis. 
 
Adiurecrin (Vasopressin) binds to V2-receptors in the kidney to increase water 
reabsorption in collecting tubules; stimulates V1-receptors in vascular smooth muscles, 
the lver, and other tissues to regulate the vascular tone, the tone of smooth muscles, 

368 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
and blood coagulation; is used in diabetes insipidus, shock, hemorrhage, 
hemophylia, atony of the gut; may cause water intoxication, hyponatremia, 
enhanced BP, a spasm of bronchi, headache, tremor. 
 
Desmopressin is a synthetic version of vasopressin, It may be given in the nose, 
IV, orally, or sublingually, is degraded more slowly than vasopressin, and requires less 
frequent administration. It works at the level of the renal collecting duct by binding to 
V2 receptors, has antidiuretic effect and little effect on BP. Desmopressin is used to 
treat central diabetes insipidus, nocturnal enuresis and nocturia. The drug can be used 
to promote the release of von Willebrand factor (with subsequent increase in factor 
VIII) in patients with coagulation disorders such as von Willebrand disease, 
hemophilia A, and thrombocytopenia. Common side effects include headaches, diar-
rhea, and low blood sodium that results in seizures. 
 
Terlipressin is an analogue of vasopressin used as vasoactive drug in the 
management of low BP when norepinephrine does not help. Like vasopressin, it 
constricts arterioles, veins and venules (especially in the abdominal cavity), lowers 
the pressure in the portal system, stimulates constriction of the esophagus smooth 
muscles, increases intestinal tone and motility, and stimulates myometrium 
activity regardless of pregnancy. Indications include bleeding from the esophageal 
varices, stomach and duodenal ulcers, genitourinary system, metrorrhagia, 
intraoperative abdominal and gynecological bleeding, norepinephrine-resistant 
septic shock, and hepatorenal syndrome Side effects are headache, pallor, 
difficulty breathing, increased BP, slow heart rate, heart failure, abdominal pain, 
nausea, vomiting, uterine contrac-tion, necrosis at the site of IM injection. 
 
THYROID HORMONES AND ANTI-THYROID DRUGS 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 Thyroid hormones 
 
–  Levothyroxine (L-thyroxine) 
 
–  α-Triiodthyronine hydrochloride 
 
– Thyreocomb 
 
 Anti-thyroid drugs 
 
–  Methimazole (Thiamazole, Mercazolil) 
 
 Iodine preparations 
 
– Sodium iodide 
 
– Potassium iodide. 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
369
 
THYROID HORMONES 
 
L-thyroxine, triiodthyronine hydrochloride and thyreocomb have common 
effects and indications. They are taken orally. Triiodthyronine is more active than 
other preparations. Thyreocomb is combined preparation containing synthetic thy-
roid hormones levothyroxine and lyothyronine together with potassium iodide. An 
overdose of thyroid hormones manifests in hyperthyroidism. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
Indications 
 
An increase in catabolism of proteins, lipids, and 
 
carbohydrates 
 
An increase in basal metabolism 
 
An increase in body temperature 
 
An increase in the activity of sympathetic nervous 
 
system 
 
Participation in growth and mental development in 
 
children. 
 
Hypothyroidism 
(myxedema, cretinism) 
Diffuse non-toxic goiter 
Thyroiditis. 
 
ANTITHYROID DRUGS 
 
Anti-thyroid drugs are preparations for the treatment of hyperthyroidism 
(thy-rotoxicosis, Basedow’s disease). 
 
METHIMAZOLE (THIAMAZOLE) 
 
 
is taken orally; concentrates in the thyroid gland 
 
 
blocks peroxidase and suppresses thyrosine’s iodination. A result is a de-
crease in the synthesis of thyroid hormones and the reduction of 
symptoms of hyperthyroidism (fig. 26.3) 
 
 
is used to treat hyperthyroidism 
 
 
may cause side-effects, such as agranulocytosis, leucopenia, skin rash, fever, 
joint pain, the depigmentation of the hair, paradontitis, necrotic stomatitis. 
 
IODINE PREPARATIONS 
 
Preparations of iodine are used: 
 
–– for the replacement of iodine deficit in hypothyroidism 
–– for the prophylaxis of hypothyroidism and goiter 
 
–– for hyperthyroidism (a back-cross decreasing of thyroid secretion, the de-
creasing of size and vascularity of gland). 

370 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
I uptake 
Thyroglobulin 
lodination of 
synthesis 
thyrosyl groups 
Condensation 
METHIMAZOLE 
Proteolytic re- 
lease of hormones 
T3 
T4 
 
Fig. 26.3. Mechanism of action of methimazole. 
 
 
HORMONES REGULATING METABOLISM 
 
OF CALCIUM AND PHOSPHATE 
 
CALCITONIN (CALCITRINUM) 
 
Calcitonin is produced by C-cells of thyroid gland (fig. 26.4). It is a protein, 
that’s why it is not administered orally. Calcitrin and miacalcic are calcitonin’s 
preparations. Calcitrin is a substance obtaining from the thyroid gland of pigs and 
is administered IM or SC. Miacalcic contains salmon calcitoin and is administered 
by injection or nasal spray. Since salmon calcitonin has a higher affinity for 
receptors (compared to mammalian calcitonins), its effect is expressed to the 
greatest extent both in strength and in duration. 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
371
Pharmacodynamics 
Indications 
Oppression of bones decalcification Osteoporosis 
An increase in the activity of osteo- Padget’s disease 
blasts 
Bone fractures 
A decrease in the activity of osteo- 
Bone pain in neoplastic malignant diseases 
clasts Inhibition of bone resorption 
Hypercalcemia 
A decrease in the calcium level in 
Caries, severe paradontitis 
blood serum. 
Hypercalcemia 
Inhibition of gastric and exocrine 
Nephrocalcinosis 
pancreatic secretion 
Combined therapy of acute pancreatitis. 
PARATHYROIDIN 
 
Parathyroidin is an antagonist of calcitonin (fig. 26.4). It is a polypeptide 
pro-duced by parathyroid glands. It is only administered parenterally. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
Indications 
 
An increase in calcium absorption in the intestine 
 
An increase in calcium reabsorption in the kidney 
 
A decrease in phosphate reabsorption in the kidney 
 
An increase in serum calcium and a decrease in 
 
serum phosphate 
 
An increase in resorption of bone tissue due to acti- 
 
vation of osteoclasts 
 
A decrease in bone mineralization 
 
Synergism to vitamin D. 
 
Hypoparathyroidism 
(teta-nus, spasmophylia) 
Allergic diseases. 

372 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
Parafollicular 
Parathyroid 
cells of 
glands 
thyroid 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 26.4. Action of calcitonin and parathyroidin on calcium metabolism 
 
(by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Teriparatide is a recombinant protein form of parathyroid hormone 
consisting of the first 34 amino acids, which is the bioactive portion of the 
hormone. Its intermit-tent use activates osteoblasts more than osteoclasts that leads 
to an overall increase in bone. The drug is an effective bone growing agent used to 
treat some forms of osteoporosis and to speed bone fracture healing. 
 
INSULIN AND HYPOGLYCEMIC DRUGS 
 
DIABETES MELLITUS 
 
Diabetes mellitus is a heterogeneous group of syndromes characterized by a 
hyperglycemia caused by relative or absolute deficiency of insulin. The classic 
symptoms of diabetes mellitus are polydipsia, polyphagia, polyuria. 
 
There are two types of diabetes mellitus: 
 
–  insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) or type І 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
373
 
–  non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) or type ІІ. 
 
Type І diabetes (10-20% of all cases) is a result of the destruction of β-cells 
and must be relayed on injected insulin. 
 
Type ІІ diabetes (80-90% of diagnosed diabetes) is a result of β-cells inability to 
produce an appropriate quantity of insulin or insulin resistance in target organs. Blood 
glucose level may be controlled by weight reduction, diet, and oral hypoglycemic drugs. 
 
ANTIDIABETIC DRUGS 
 
Antidiabetic drugs are hormonal preparations and synthetic drugs for the 
treat-ment of diabetes mellitus. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Insulin preparations 
 
 Fast-acting (begin to work within 5-15 min and are active for 3-4 hrs) 
 
– Aspart 
 
– Lispro 
 
– Glulisine 
 
 Short-acting (begin working within 30 min and is active about 5-8 hrs) 
 
– Regular insulin 
 
– Actrapid 
 
– Humulin R 
 
 Intermediate-acting (begin working in 1-3 hrs and is active 16-24 hrs) 
 
– Protaphane 
 
– Monotard 
 
 Long-acting (begin working within 1-2 hrs and continue to be active, 
without major peaks or dips, for about 24 hrs) 
– Glargine 
 
 Ultra-long acting (begin working within 30–90 min and continues to be ac-
tive for greater than 24 hrs) 
– Degludec 
 
 Combination insulin products (begin to work with the shorter acting insulin 
and remain active for 16-24 hrs) 
– Novolog Mix 70/30 
 
– Novomix 30 
 
– Humalog Mix 
 
B. Oral hypoglycemic agents 
 
 Sulfonylureas 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
– Glibenclamide 
 
– Glycvidone 
 
– Glycolide 
 
 Biguanides 
 
– Metformin 
 
 α-glucosidase inhibitors 
 
– Acarbose 
 
 Glinides (Prandial glusose regulators) 
 
– Repaglinide 
 
 Thiazolidinediones (insulin sensitizers) 
 
– Pioglitazone. 
 
 
REGULAR INSULIN 
 
Insulin is a short protein consisting of two chains that are connected by 
disulfide bonds. It is synthesized by β-cells of the pancreas. 
Sources of insulin (fig. 26.5): 
 
–  pork and buff pancreas; 
 
–  special strain of genetically modified E. coli. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered SC, IV (in hyperglycemic emergency) 
 
 
starts to act in 15-30 min; has duration of action of 5-8 hrs 
 
 
is inactivated by insulinase in the liver and kidney. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
An increase in glucose entry into cells 
A decrease in gluconeogenesis 
 
An increase in utilization of glucose in 
the cells 
 
An increase in glycogen synthesis in 
the liver and skeletal muscles 
 
Lowering of the glucose level in blood 
(hypoglycemic action) 
 
An increase in protein synthesis 
The promotion of cells proliferation 
(growth factor) 
 
The regulation of lipid metabolism 
A decrease in ketoacidosis 
 
Indications 
 
Diabetes mellitus (type 1, type 
2) Diabetic (hyperglycemic) 
coma Gestational diabetes 
Cachexia 
 
Furunculosis 
 
Liver diseases 
 
Insulin-comatous therapy of 
schizo-phrenia 
 
For better availability of glucose 
du- ring IV infusion. 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
375
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Hypoglycemia (tachycardia, confusion, vertigo, sweating, hypoglycemic 
coma) 
 
Lypodystrophy in the site of administration 
 
 Low blood potassium 
 
4. Allergy. 
 
 
 
Porcine insulin 
Ala 
Insulin 
B 
- chain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 S 
 
 
 
S   S 
 
 
 
30 
Thr 
Human insulin 
Production:  DNA 
- chain 
E. coll 
A 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 26.5. Sources of insulin (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
INSULIN PREPARATIONS OF PROLONGED ACTION 
 
Protaphane is of the crystals of human biosynthetic insulin; is administered 
SC; has start of action in 1.5 hrs, maximal effect within 4-12 hrs and duration of 
action near 24 hrs. 
 
Monotard is intermediate-acting insulin preparation containing biosynthetic 
human zinc-insulin as suspension of amorphous and crystalline particles; is 
admin-istered SC; has start of action in 2.5 hrs, maximal effect within 7-15 hrs and 
duration of action near 24 hrs. 
 
Insulin glargine is a long-acting biosynthetic human insulin preparation. After 
SC administration into the subcutaneous fat tissue, it forms micro-precipitates, from 
which small amounts of insulin glargine are continuously released, providing a smooth 
(without peaks) profile of the concentration-time curve, as well as a long duration of 
action of the drug, is administered only SC once a day. 
 
Insulin degludec is an analogue of human insulin, ultra-long acting preparation; 
duration of action is more than 42 hrs due to formation of soluble stable multihex-
amers (insulin depot) in the subcutaneous fat. Multihexamers gradually dissociate, 

376 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
releasing insulin degludec monomers, resulting in a slow and prolonged delivery 
of the drug into the blood, providing a long-term planar profile of action and a 
stable hypoglycemic effect. 
 
 
DIABETIC (HYPERGLYCEMIC) AND INSULIN 
 
(HYPOGLYCEMIC) COMA 
 
Diabetic (hyperglycemic) coma 
 
Signs: 
 
This coma develops due to a high blood sugar level and is characterized by 
unconsciousness, hyperemia of the skin, a low tone of skeletal muscles and eyes, 
specific odor from breathing air and urine, hyperglycemia and ketoacidosis. 
 
Emergency help: 
 
–  regular insulin (IV) 
 
– 0,9% solution of sodium chloride for a decrease in hyperosmolarity of 
blood (IV infusion) 
 
–  4% solution of sodium bicarbonate for the decrease in acidosis (IV infusion) 
 
–  thiamine as synergist of insulin (bigger dose). 
 
Insulin (hypoglycemic) coma 
 
Signs: 
 
This coma results from a low blood sugar level caused by an overdose of 
insu-lin. It is characterized by slow development, the pre-coma period, 
unconsciousness, sweating, cold pale skin, a high tone of skeletal muscles and 
eyes, seizures, the absence of specific odor, hypoglycemia. 
 
Emergency help: 
 
–  sweet tea and white bread by mouth during pre-coma 
 
–  40% solution of glucose (IV) in a comatous condition 
 
–  epinephrine, prednisolone, or glucagon as contra-insular hormones. 
 
ORAL HYPOGLYCEMIC DRUGS 
 
Oral hypoglycemic drugs are synthetic non-hormonal preparations which can 
lower the glucose level in blood. Preparations from each group are characterized 
by a common mechanism of action and pharmacological properties. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Sulfonylurea derivatives (Glibenclamide, Glycvidone, Glycolide): 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
377
 
 
an increase of insulin release from the pancreas 
 
 
reduction of serum glucagon concentration 
 
 
the potentiation of insulin action on target cells. 
 
 
Biguanides (Metformin) 
 
 
an increase of glycolysis in tissues 
 
 
the inhibition of hepatic gluconeogenesis 
 
 
a decrease in glucose reabsorption in the GI tract 
 
 
the reduction of the plasma glucagon level 
 
 
a decrease in the absorption of lipids in the gut and the reduction of body weight 
 
 
lowering of hyperlipidemia. 
 
 
α-glucosidase inhibitors (Acarbose) 
 
 
a competitive inhibition of a-glucosidase 
 
 
a decrease of monosaccharide absorption 
 
 
a decrease in the blood sugar level 
 
 
Prandial glucose regulators (Repaglinide) 
 
 
A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 26.6. Chemical structure of some adrenal steroids: 
 
A – hydrocortisone; B – triamcinolone. 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
very rapid onset and short duration of action in stimulating insulin secretion 
 
 
restoration of the insulin secretion pattern at mealtimes (prandial phase)-
without stimulating insulin secretion in the 'postabsorptive' phase 
 
 
Thiazolidinediones 
 
an increase in the tissue insulin sensitivity. 
 
Indications 
 
Type ІІ non-insulin-dependent diabetes in patients after the age of 35 years old. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Hypoglycemia 
 
 
GI disturbances 
 
 
Itch 
 
 
Anemia 
 
 
Hyponatremia, hypotension, disulfiram-like reaction (after the 
administra-tion of some drugs). 
 
GLUCAGON 
 
 
 
 
 
histamine 
liberation 
 
 Blood 
 phago- 
vessels permea- 
cytosis 
bility 
 
GLUCOCORTICOIDS’ 
 
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY 
 
ACTION 
 
 
 
 
 antibody 
Arachidonate 
synthesis 
synthesis 
 
Fig. 26.7. Components of glucocorticoids anti-inflammatory action. 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
379
 
 
is a peptide hormone, produced by α-cells of the pancreas 
 
 
is given IV, IM, or SC 
 
 
binds to the glucagon receptor, a G protein-coupled receptor, located in 
the cell membrane 
 
works to raise the concentration of glucose and lipids in the bloodstream, 
is considered to be the main catabolic hormone of the body; produces the 
effect opposite to that of insulin 
 
 
is used to treat low blood sugar, β-adrenoblocker overdose, calcium chan-
nel blocker overdose, and those with anaphylaxis who do not improve 
with epinephrine 
 
 
can cause such common side effects as vomiting, low blood potassium 
and hypotension. 
 
ADRENAL STEROIDS (CORTICOSTEROIDS) 
 
Adrenal steroids are steroidal hormones produced by the adrenal cortex or 
their synthetic analogs (fig. 26.6). 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Glucocorticoids 
 
 
Short-acting (8-12 hours) 
–  Hydrocortisone acetate 
 
Intermediate-acting glucocorticoids (18-36 hours) 
–  Prednisolone 
–  Methylprednisolone 
–  Triamcinolone 
 
Long-acting glucocorticoids (1-3 days) 
–  Dexamethasone 
 
Topically active glucocorticoids 
–  Beclomethasone dipropionate 
–  Fluocinolone acetonide 
B. Mineralocorticoids 
 
–  Desoxycorticosterone acetate. 
 
GLUCOCORTICOIDS 
 
Glucocorticoids are adrenal steroids with a prevalent action on metabolism and 
inflammation. All glucocorticoids produce common pharmacological effects. They 
have some common indications, contraindications, and side-effects. As a rule, 
contraindications are not taking into acount if the drug is used for emergency help. 

380 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
are administered IM, IV, topically, by inhalation; all drugs may be taken 
orally 
 
are well absorbed in the GI tract 
 
bind to plasma proteins (90% of a dose) 
 
are metabolized in the liver 
 
are excreted with urine in the form of metabolites (glucuronides and sulfates). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
Indications 
 
An increase in protein catabolism 
 
Collagenosis, severe rheumatism, arthri-
tis, arthrosis 
 
An increase in gluconeogenesis 
 
Bronchial asthma 
 
An increase in glucose level in blood 
 
Allergic diseases of the skin and 
mucous membranes 
 
The regulation of lipids 
distribution, an increase in lipolysis 
 
Autoimmune diseases 
 
The retention of sodium and water 
 
Transplantation of organs 
 
An increase in excretion of potassium Acute leukemia 
and calcium 
 
A decrease in all phases of inflam-
mation 
 
Shock 
 
The suppression of immunity 
 
Hypoglycemic coma 
 
The suppression of allergic reactions 
 
Anaphylactic shock 
 
Changes in blood film 
(eosinopenia, lymphopenia) 
 
Adrenal insufficiency (natural hormones 
are preferable) 
 
The inhibition of lymphoid tissue 
 
proliferation 
 
An increase in resistance to stress. 
 
Glucocorticoids are among the most potent anti- inflammatory agents. They 
inhibit all three stages of inflammation. The inhibition of alteration and exudation is 
due to the reduction of blood vessels permeability, the inhibition of hyaluroni-dase 
activity, the stabilizing of mast cells membranes and a decrease in histamine liberation, 
the stabilizing of lysosomal membranes and a decrease in the release of lysosomal 
enzymes, the inhibition of leukocytes activity in the site of inflammation (fig. 26.7). In 
contrast to NSAIDs, glucocorticoids inhibit phospholipase A, disturb synthesis of 
arachidonate and consequently inhibit prostaglandins synthesis. Their 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
381
 
influence on the proliferation stage is based on the inhibition of protein synthesis 
and fibroblasts activity. 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. The suppression of the pituitary-adrenal function 
1. Hyperfunction of 
2. Immune suppression and an increase in susceptibil- 
the adrenal cortex 
ity to infection 
2. Hypertension 
3. Gastric ulceration 
3. Severe CHF 
4. Hypertension 
4. Nephritis 
5. An increase of blood coagulation resulting in 
5. Acute endocarditis 
thrombosis 
6. Ulcerative disease 
6. Edema, retention of sodium and water 
of the stomach and 
7. An increase of appetite resulting in enhanced body 
duodenum 
weight 
7. Syphilis 
8. Hypokalemia 
8. Active forms of 
9. Osteoporosis, severe caries 
tuberculosis 
10. Hyperglycemia (steroid diabetes) 
9. Diabetes mellitus 
11. Dystrophy of skeletal muscles 
10. Osteoporosis 
12. Disturbances in the function of other endocrinal 
11. Psychosis 
glands 
12. Pregnancy. 
 
Psychic disorders (depression, insomnia, 
somno-lence, “steroid psychosis”). 
 
PECULIARITIES OF PREPARATIONS 
 
Hydrocortisone is in the form of ointment, eye ointment, suspension for injec-
tions; is used topically to treat allergic eye diseases, aseptic burns of the eyes or after 
eye surgeries (not earlier than 7 days after the operation); is also applied in allergic 
skin diseases and administered in arthritis, arthrosis (into joint), bronchial asthma. 
 
Prednisolone is a synthetic derivative of hydrocortisone; is more potent than 
hydrocortisone in 3-4 times; is administered orally, IM, IV, or applied topically in 
the form of ointment or eye drops; has T½ of 2-3 hrs. 
 
Methylprednisolone, as compared to prednisolone, has a slightly higher (by 
20%) glucocorticoid activity, minimal mineralocorticoid action, less often causes 
undesirable reactions (especially psychic disorders, changes in the appetite, and 
ulcerogenic effect), is used mainly for pharmacodynamic therapy, is preferable in 
patients with mental disorders, obesity, peptic ulcer. 

382 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Dexametasone contains fluorine; is more active than hydrocortisone and pred-
nisolone; has less side-effects; is administered orally, IM, IV or applied topically in the 
form of ointment or eye drops; has T½ of 3-4,5 hrs; is characterized by 72 hrs duration 
of an anti-inflammation effect after the oral administration. 
 
Triamcinilone (Kenalog) contains fluorine; has a prolonged action; has T½= 1,5-
3,3 hrs which is not correlated with a duration of action; develops maximal effect in 
24-48 hrs and acts during 6 weeks; is used to treat arthritis, arthrosis, joint lesions 
caused by collagenosis, rheumatism; is injected in the site of lesion in psoriasis, 
neurodermitis, lupus erythematoidis; is not administered IV; has less side-effects than 
other preparations (less retention of sodium and water, less diabetogenous action). 
Fluocinolone acetonide (Flucinar) is a fluorine-containing preparation for a 
topical application in dermatology; is used in the form of ointment, penetrates the 
upper layer of epidermis and stays in the skin during 15 days; is indicated in 
allergic and inflammatory diseases of the skin, psoriasis, lupus erythematoidis; 
should not be used for a long-time treatment or on the large area of lesion; may 
cause generalization of infection if used without antimicrobial drugs. 
 
Beclomethasone dipropionate is used in the form of inhalations for the pre-
vention of a bronchial asthma attack; penetrates into the airway mucosa, but has a 
short half-life in the body, so that systemic effects and toxicity are greatly reduced. 
 
MINERALCORTICOIDS 
 
DESOXYCORTICOSTERONE ACETATE 
 
 
is administered IM and sublingually 
 
 
regulates reabsorption of sodium, promotes retention of phosphate, 
calcium, carbonate, water, and sodium 
 
 
supports BP and the muscular tone 
 
 
is used to treat adrenocortical insufficiency and myastenia 
 
 
may cause edema, hypertension, hypokalemia. 
 
ANTAGONISTS OF ADRENAL STEROIDS 
 
Metyrapone inhibits the synthesis of adrenal steroids; is used for the 
treatment of adrenal hyperfunction (Cushing’s syndrome). 
 
Aminoglutethimide reduces the synthesis of hormonally active steroids; is 
used to treat breast cancer and adrenal cortex malignances. 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
383
 
Ketokonazole is an antifungal drug; inhibits the synthesis of gonadal and 
adrenal steroids; is used to treat Cushing’s syndrome. 
 
Spironolactone is an antagonist of aldosterone; it binds to mineralcorticoid 
receptor and inhibits sodium reabsorption in the kidney; antagonizes aldosterone and 
testosterone synthesis; is used as diuretic and for the treatment of hirsutism in women. 
 
GONADAL HORMONES AND RELATED SUBSTANCES 
 
Gonadal hormones are steroidal hormones produced by the male and female go-
nadal glands which regulate the development of sex characteristics and reproduction. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 
Male gonadal hormones and related substances 
 
 
Androgens 
 
–  Testosterone propionate 
 
–  Methyltestosterone 
 
 
Anti-androgens 
 
–  Flutamide 
 
–  Finasteride 
 
–  Cyproterone acetate 
 
 
Anabolic steroids 
 
–  Methandienone (Methandrostenolone) 
 
–  Nandrolone phenylpropionate (Phenobolin) 
 
–  Nandrolone deconoate (Retabolil) 
 
 
Female gonadal hormones and related substances 
 
 
Estrogens 
 
–  Estron 
 
–  Estradiol benzoate 
 
–  Estriol 
 
–  Ethinylestradiol 
 
–  Synoestrol 
 
–  Diethylstilbestrol 
 
 
Combined preparations 
 
–  Klimonorm 
 
 Anti-estrogens 
 
– Clomiphene citrate 
 
– Tamoxifen citrate 
 
 Progestins 
 
Progesterone 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
– Hydroxyprogesterone caproate 
 
– Allilestrnol 
 
– Dydrogesterone 
 
– Norethisterone 
 
 Antiprogestins 
 
– Mifepristone. 
 
 
ANDROGENS 
 
Androgens are male gonadal hormones produced mainly by testis or their 
synthetic analogues. 
 
TESTOSTERONE PROPIONATE 
 
 
is administered IM 
 
 
takes part in the development of primary and secondary sex 
characteristics, maintains fertility in men; has an anabolic action; 
maintains normal bone density 
 
is used to treat hypogonadism in men; may be used in a combined 
therapy of certain anemias, wasting syndromes, senile osteoporosis, 
severe burns, breast cancer in women before 60 
 
may caue side-effects, such as masculinization in women, an altered bone 
development in children, the inhibition of gonadotropin release and 
reduc-tion of spermatogenesis; gynecomastia in men, hepatitis, edema. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Methyltestosterone is a synthetic analogue of testosterone and has the same 
androgenic properties; is not destroyed in the gut; is taken sublingually for better 
bioavailability; is 3-4 times less active than testosterone propionate; is used for a long-
lasting therapy of male hypogonadism, a pathological climax in men, impotence 
connected with the hypofunction of testis, climacteric disturbances and breast cancer in 
women; displays side-effects similar to adverse effects of testosterone. 
 
ANTIANDROGENS 
 
 
Antiandrogens (androgen antagonists, or testosterone blockers) are 
drugs that prevent androgens’biological effects in the body. 
 
There are a few different types of antiandrogens: adrogen receptor an-
tagonists divided into steroidal antiandrogens (Cyproterone acetate) and 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
385
 
nonsteroidal antiandrogens (Flutamide); androgen synthesis inhibitors 
(Finasteride) and antigonadotropins (Leuprorelin, Cetrorelix). 
 
Antiandrogens are used to treat androgen-dependent conditions: prostate 
cancer, enlarged prostate, scalp hair loss, overly high sex drive, and early 
puberty (in males); acne, seborrhea, excessive hair growth, scalp hair 
loss, and high androgen levels (in women). They are also used as a 
component of feminizing hormone therapy for transgender women. 
 
 
Side effects in men include breast enlargement, feminization, hot flashes, 
sexual dysfunction, infertility, and osteoporosis. In women, antiandrogens 
can cause low estrogen levels and associated symptoms like hot flashes, 
menstrual irregularities, and osteoporosis in premenopausal women. 
 
ANABOLIC STEROIDS 
 
Anabolic steroids are derivatives of androgens with a strong anabolic effect 
and residual androgenic activity. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
Indications 
 
An increase in protein synthesis 
 
The retention of nitrogen, phosphor, and 
 
calcium 
 
The stimulation of tissue regeneration 
 
An increase in mass of skeletal muscles 
 
The improvement in trophy of myocardium 
 
A decrease in glucose level in blood 
 
The stimulation of hemopoiesis. 
 
Cachexia 
 
Asthenia 
 
Wounds, ulcers 
 
Bone fractures, osteoporosis 
 
Ischemic heart disease 
 
Myopathy 
 
Diabetes mellitus (additional drug) 
 
Anemia (additional drug) 
 
Prolonged treatment with glucocorticoids 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Edema 
 
 
An increase in body weight 
 
Liver disturbances 
 
Masculinization in women. 
 
The anabolics should not be used in sportsmen as a doping. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF PREPARATIONS 
 
Methandienone (Methandrostenolone) has an anabolic activity equal to the 
same of testosterone, but is less active in 100 times as androgen than testosterone; 
is taken orally 1-2 times a day 

386 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Nandrolone phenylpropionate (Phenobolin) is administered IM; has a 
duration of action of 7-15 days. 
 
Nandrolone decanoate (Retabolil) has a strong and long-lasting anabolic ac-
tion; develops therapeutic effect in 3 days, displays maximal effect for 7 days and 
acts during 3 weeks; has a minimal androgenic and virilizing action. 
 
ESTROGENS 
 
Estrogens are female gonadal hormones produced by ovaries or their 
synthetic analogues. 
 
ESTRONE (FOLLICULIN)) 
 
 
is natural estrogen 
 
is administered IM, transdermally, vaginally; is metabolized in the liver 
and excreted with urine 
 
 
takes part in female sexual development, maintains the proliferation 
phase of menstrual cycle, increases uterus sensitivity to oxytocin and 
acetylcholine, has some metabolic effects (the inhibition of bone 
resorption, stimulation of calcium transport, reduction of the cholesterol 
level in blood), increases blood coagulation 
 
 
is used for primary hypogonadism in young female, replacement therapy 
in menopause (postmenopausal hormone therapy) (fig.26.8), a lack of the 
development of the ovaries or castration, for osteoporosis, stimulation of 
labor (together with oxytocin) 
 
 
may cause side-effects, such as nausea, vomiting, edema, headache, 
hyper-tension, breast tenderness. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Estradiol dipropionate is a natural estrogen produced in female organism to-
gether with estrone, but is more active; has a prolonged action and is administered 
IM once in 3-5 days; has the indications similar to the indications of estrone. 
 
Estriol is low-active natural estrogen used orally and intravaginally to treat 
the atrophy of the mucous membrane in the lower urinary tract due to estrogen 
deficiency, pre- and postoperative therapy in postmenopausal women with 
operative interven-tions by vaginal access, climacteric syndrome; infertility caused 
by cervical factor; dryness of the vagina, frequent urination. 
 
Ethinylestradiol is a synthetic estrogen similar to estradiol by its structure; is 
taken orally, has slow metabolism, a prolonged action, and higher potency; is used 
for primary amenorhea, the hyhofunction of ovaries and secondary amenorrhea, 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
387
 
climacteric disturbances in women, breast cancer in women after 60, prostate 
cancer in men; may cause feminization in men, nausea, vomiting, vertigo. 
 
Synoestrol is a synthetic compound – a stilben derivative; has not a steroid 
structure, but has estrogenic pharmacological properties and indications; is admin-
istered orally, IM, SC 
Diethylstilbestrol is a synthetic non-steroidal compound with estrogenic activity, 
may be administered orally, IM; is more active than estrone and synoestrol. 
 
Klimonorm contains estradiol valerate, which in the human body is converted to 
natural 17β-estradiol as well as progesterone derivative levonorgestrel adding of which 
within 12 days of each cycle prevents the development of hyperplasia and endo-metrial 
cancer. Due to the composition and the cyclic schedule of administration, the drug can 
restore the menstrual cycle in postmenopausal women. Estradiol replenishes the 
estrogen deficiency in the female body after the onset of menopause and provides 
effective treatment of psychoemotional and vegetative climacteric symptoms; invo-
lution of the skin and mucous membranes, reduces the risk of atherosclerosis and IHD, 
inhibits proliferative processes in the endometrium; (fig. 26.8). Estradiol also prevents 
bone loss caused by estrogen deficiency mainly due to the suppression of osteoclast 
function and stimulation of the bone remodeling process and in such way can reduce 
the risk of fractures of peripheral bones in women after menopause. The drug is used 
for hormone replacement therapy in pre- and postmenopause, for the treatment of 
climacteric syndrome, postclimacteric dysfunction of urinary bladder and for 
prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis in women. 
 
 
 
 
sleep 
 
 
 osteo-                            atrophy 
 
porosis 
POST- 
of genital tract 
 
MENOPAUSAL 
 
HORMONAL 
 
THERAPY 
 
 
 cardio- 
 vaso- 
 
vascular 
motor 
 
diseases 
reactions 
 
Fig. 26.8. Main effects of postmenopausal hormonal therapy by estrogens. 

388 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
ANTIESTROGENS 
 
Antiestrogens (estrogen antagonists or estrogen blockers) are the drugs 
which prevent estrogens’ biological effects in the body. They include selective 
estrogen receptor modulators (Tamoxifen, Clomifene), selective estrogen receptor 
degrader (Fulvestrant), aromatase inhibitors (Anastrozole). Androgens, anabolic 
steroids, progestogens, and GnRH analogueues also have antiestrogen effect. 
 
Antiestrogens are mainly used as estrogen deprivation therapy in the treatment of 
estrogen-positive breast cancer, for infertility, male hypogonadism, and gyneco-mastia 
and as a component of hormone replacement therapy for transgender men. 
Clomiphene interacts with estrogen receptors; by a feed-back mechanism it 
stimulates the secretion of gonadotropins, leading to ovulation; is used to treat in-
fertility on the ground of anovulatory cycles. 
Tamoxifen inhibits estrogens action by interfering with their access to 
receptor sites; is used to treat breast cancer in postmenopausal women. 
 
PROGESTINS 
 
Progestins are female gonadal hormones produced by corpus luteum or their 
synthetic analogues. 
 
PROGESTERONE 
 
 
is native progestine 
 
 
is given IM, orally (as a micronized form), intravaginally (vaginal cream) 
 
 
takes part in the development of sexual characteristics, maintains the 
luteal phase of a menstrual cycle, stimulates maturation of the uterus 
endometrium and provides implantation, decreases uterus sensitivity to 
oxytocin and supports the normal development of pregnancy, promotes 
the development of breast secretory tissue, acts on carbohydrate 
metabolism and stimulates fat deposition 
 
 
is used for the prevention of spontaneous abortion, dysfunctional uterine 
bleeding, dysmenorrhea, endometriosis, suppression of postpartum lacta-
tion, endometrial carcinoma 
 
 
may cause side-effects, such as uterine bleeding, dyspepsia, edema, 
depres-sion, an increase in the cholesterol level, an increase in blood 
coagulation, acne, hirsutism, weight gain. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Oxyprogesterone caproate is a synthetic analogue of progesterone, is more 
stable in the body and has prolonged action during 7-14 days; is administered IM; 
is more suitable for a long-term therapy. 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
389
 
Allilestrenol is a synthetic progestin; is administered orally, is more stable to 
first-pass metabolism; is used for the prevention of spontaneous abortion. 
 
Dydrogesterone is a progestin, an agonist of the progesterone receptor. The drug 
is atypical progestogen and does not inhibit ovulation, has weak antimineralocorticoid 
activity and no other important hormonal activity. It is used orally for miscarriage 
during pregnancy, dysfunctional bleeding, infertility due to luteal insufficiency, 
dysmenorrhea, endometriosis, secondary amenorrhea, irregular cycles, premenstrual 
syndrome, and as a component of menopausal hormone therapy. Side effects more 
often include menstrual irregularities, headache, nausea, breast tenderness. 
 
Norethisterone is a progestin, an agonist of the progesterone receptor like pro-
gesterone. It has weak androgenic and estrogenic activity at high doses, is used alon or 
in cominatio with estrogen, is applied in birth control pills, menopausal hormone 
therapy, and for the treatment of gynecological disorders. Side effects are typical to 
progesrins and include menstrual irregularities, headaches, nausea, breast tenderness, 
mood changes, acne, increased hair growth, etc. 
 
ANTIPROGESTINS 
 
Antiprogestogens (antiprogestins, progesterone antagonists) are drugs 
which prevent progestogens’ biological effects in the body. They act by blocking 
the progesterone receptor or inhibiting progesterone production. They are used as 
abortifacients and emergency contraceptives and in the treatment of uterine 
fibroids. Between many compounds of this class, only Mifepristone has been 
approved and introduced for clinical use. 
 
Mefipristone is a progestine antagonist, has antiglucocorticoid activity, is 
used for the termination of gestation and for contraception. 
 
ORAL AND INPLANTABLE CONTRACEPTIVES 
 
Hormonal contraceptives are hormonal preparations for the prevention of 
pregnancy. 
There are 4 main classes of oral contraceptives (fig. 23.9). 
 
 
Combination pills contain estrogen and progestin. The estrogen suppresses 
ovulation. The progestin prevents implantation and makes the cervical mucus 
impenetrable to sperm. They are taken in mono-, bi- or triphase regimen. 
Monophasic drugs are Logest and Marvelon. Biphasic prepara-tion is 
Anteovin, Triphasic preparations are Tri-regol, Triquilar, Trisiston. 
 
 
Progestin pills contain a progestin only (norethindrone or norgestel). 
They are less effective than the combination pills. 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Progestin inplants are subdermal capsules containing levonorgestrel for 
a long-term contraception (5 years) (e.g., Depo-provera) 
 
Postcoital contraceptives contain a high dose of estrogen (ethinylestradiol, 
diethylstilbestrol) or estrogen (ethinylestradiol) and progestin (norgestrel) 
administered within 72 hrs of coitus (e.g., Postinor). 
 
 
ORAL AND IMPLANTABLE CONTRACEPTIVES 
 
Combination pills 
 
Progestin pills (mini-pills) 
 
Progestin inplants 
 
Postcoital contraceptives 
 
Fig. 26.9. Classes of oral contraceptives. 
 
Side-effects of oral contraceptives 
 
Breast fullness, depression, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, thromboembolism, 
thrombophlebitis, hypertension, increased incidents of myocardial infarction and 
cerebral thrombosis, abnormal glucose tolerance tests, changes in the serum lipo-
protein profile, cholestatic jundice, skin pigmentation, acne, hirsutism, 
amenorrhea, uterine bleeding. 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. The hormonal preparation with mineralcorticoid activity is: 
 
 
Prednisolone 
 
 
Dexamthasone 
 
 
Testosterone propionate 
 
 
Desoxycorticostrone acetate 
 
 
Estradiol caproate. 
 
№2. Glucocorticoids may cause all the following side-effects, except: 
 
 
Hypertension 
 
 
Bronchospasm 
 
 
Thromboembolism 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
391
 
 
Hypokalemia 
 
 
Osteoporosis. 
 
№3. Regular insulin: 
 
 
Is produced by genetically modified E.coli 
 
 
Is administered SC, IV 
 
 
Is used for replacement therapy of I type diabetes mellitus 
 
 
Is taken orally in II type diabetes mellitus 
 
 
May cause hyperglycemia. 
 
№4. Anabolic steroids: 
 
 
Have high androgenic activity 
 
 
Have high anabolic activity 
 
 
May cause feminization in men 
 
 
May cause masculinization in women 
 
 
Are contraindicated to sportsmen. 
 
 
5. The patient suffering from the hypofunction of the thyroid gland was 
treated by hormonal preparation. Overdose of this preparation causes 
restlessness, insomnia, fever, headache, tachycardia, pain in the heart, 
palpitation, tremor. What drug was used by this patient? 
 
 
Insulin 
 
 
Methimazole 
 
 
L-thyroxine 
 
 
Triamcinolone 
 
 
Retabolil. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – D; № 2 – B; № 3 – A, B, C; № 4 – B, D, E; № 5 – C. 

392 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 VITAMINS 
PREPARATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VITAMINS AND THEIR PREPARATIONS 
 
Vitamins are organic substances essential for normal metabolism. They are 
the normal components of diet and must be supplied in very small quantities. 
 
History of vitamins. A russian scientist N. Lunin discovered vitamins (1880). 
Holand Ch. Echman supposed that rice husk contained substance for the prevention 
and treatment of disease beri-beri (vitamin B1) (1897). A polish scientist K. Funk 
separated this substance from rice husk and proposed the name “vitamin”. 
 
Vitamins preparations are medicinal forms of vitamins used for the 
prophylaxis and treatment of diseases. 
 
Distinguishes between membrane-tropic 
 
and enzyme-tropic vitamins 
 
Division of vitamins into groups is based on their biochemical properties and 
participation in biological processes. Some common characteristics make it 
possible to speak about membrane-tropic and enzyme-tropic vitamins (table 27.1). 

Chapter 26.  HORMONAL PREPARATIONS 
393
 
Table 27.1. Distinguishes between groups of vitamins 
 
Membrane-tropic vitamins 
Enzyme-tropic vitamins 
1. Are fat and water-soluble substances 
1. Are only water-soluble substances 
2. Have a requirement of 100 mg per day 
2. Have a requirement of 1-10 mg per day 
3. Are components of cell membranes 
3. Are components of enzymes (co-en- 
4. Are not phosphorilized 
zymes) 
5. Take part in the forming and protection 
4. Are phosphorilized 
of cells membranes 
5. Take part in biochemical reactions 
6. May cause hypervitaminosis 
6. Don’t cause hypervitaminosis 
 
Vitamin deficiency 
 
Avitaminosis is a specific deficiency syndrome caused by the absence of par-
ticular vitamin. It is occurred very rarely. 
 
Hypovitaminosis is a specific deficiency syndrome caused by the deficit of 
particular vitamin. It is often occurred. There are two types of hypovitaminoses: 
exogeneous and endogeneous (fig. 27.1). Exogeneous hypovitaminosis is caused 
by factors outside the body, e.g. deficit of vitamin in the diet or poor nutrition. 
Endogeneous hypovitaminosis is caused by factors inside the organism and is 
divided into physiological and pathological. 
 
 
HYPOVITAMINOSIS 
 
 
 
Exogenous 
Endogenous 
(caused by 
(caused by 
exogenic factors) 
endogenic factors) 
Physiological 
Pathological 
(caused by pregnancy, lactation, 
(caused by diseases and their 
quick growth, stress) 
treatment) 
 
 
Fig. 27.1. Types of hypovitaminosis. 
 
Antivitamins 
 
Antivitamins are substances which decrease a vitamins action. 
 
There are three groups of antivitamins: 

 
antimetabolites which are chemical analogues of vitamins (e.g. 
Neodicumarinum is an antivitamin of naphthoquinon; isoniazid is an an-
tivitamin of pyridoxine; methotrexate is an antivitamin of the folic acid) 
 
 
enzymes which destroy vitamins (e.g. thiaminase, ascorbinase) 
 
 
substances which increase the utilization of vitamin (e.g. anti-
atherosclerotic drug Linaetholum increases the utilization of vitamin E). 
 
Hypervitaminosis 
 
Hypervitaminosis is the overdose of a vitamin preparation. 
 
Most of vitamins are comparatively safe, but vitamins A and D can cause 
seri-ous toxic effects. Hypervitaminosis may be acute and chronic. 
 
Vitamins therapy 
 
Vitamins therapy is the therapy by vitamins preparations. 
 
Vitamins therapy is divided into three types (fig. 27.2): 
 
 
specific replacement therapy which is the use of vitamins for the 
treatment of hypo- and avitaminosis (e.g. the ascorbic acid is for the 
treatment of scurvy; thiamine – for beri-beri) 
 
 
pharmacodynamic therapy which is the use of vitamins for diseases non-
connected with vitamins deficit (e.g. the use of the ascorbic acid to treat 
wounds and infections) 
 
 
adaptation therapy which is the use of vitamins for the improvement of 
non-specific resistance and adaptation (e.g. the use of the ascorbic acid, 
tocopherol acetate, and multivitamins preparations in healthy persons 
under the conditions of stress or physical overstrain). 
 
 
VITAMINS THERAPY 
 
 
Specific (replacement) therapy 
 
 
Pharmacodynamic therapy 
 
 
Adaptation therapy 
 
Fig. 27.2. The types of vitamins therapy. 
 
СLASSIFICATION 

Chapter 27.  VITAMINS PREPARATIONS 
395 
According to the solubility 
According to the biological activity 
1. Water-soluble 
1. Membrane-tropic 
– 
Thiamine chloride (B1) 
– 
Vitamin A 
– 
Riboflavin (B2) 
– 
Vitamin E 
–  Nicotinic acid (B3 or PP) 
– 
Vitamin D 
– 
Calcium pantothenate (B5) 
– 
Vitamin K 
– 
Pyridoxine hydrochloride (B6) 
– 
Vitamin C 
– 
Cyanocobalamin (B12) 
– 
Vitamin P 
– 
Folic acid (Bc) 
2. Enzyme-tropic (co-enzymic) 
– 
Calcium pangamate (B15) 
– 
Vitamin B1 
– 
Ascorbic acid (C) 
– 
Vitamin B2 
– 
Rutin (P) 
– 
Vitamin PP 
2. Fat-soluble 
– 
Vitamin B5 
–  Retinol acetate (A) and related 
– 
Vitamin B6 
substances 
– 
Vitamin B12 
–  Ergocalciferol (D) and related 
– 
Vitamin BC 
substances 
–  α-Tocopherol acetate (E) 
 
–  Naphthoquinon (K) 
 
 
MEMBRANE-TROPIC VITAMINS PREPARATIONS 
RETINOL ACETATE 
 
Retinol has a polyenic structure (fig. 27.3). It is a fat-soluble vitamin. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 27.3. Chemical structure of retinol. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally, rarely IM, is applied topically 
 
 
is absorbed in the intestine in the presence of bile acids 
 
 
binds to proteins in blood serum that protects retinol from renal excretion 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
concentrtes in the liver 
 
 
exists in the body in such forms as retinol, retinal, and retinoic acid 
 
is metabolized in the liver and excreted with bile and urine, has durative 
elimination. 
  
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Active form of retinol is a constituent of visual purple (rhodopsin). 
 
It takes part in the synthesis of keratohyalin. 
 
It takes part in the forming of bones and teeth. 
 
Retinol activates synthesis of immunoglobulins, antibodies, lysosome 
enzymes. 
 
 
It activates glycogen deposit in the muscles, heart, and liver. 
 
Retinol activates release of STH, thyroid hormones. 
 
It is an antioxidant. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
supporting of the normal function of the retina (night vision) 
 
stimulation of the proliferation and regeneration of the epithelium 
 
the promotion of growth of the organism, prevention of bones’ epiphyses 
calcification 
 
 
an increase of immunity 
 
the improvement in the trophy of the myocardium, skeletal muscles, 
liver, the nervous system 
 
 
supporting of the reproductive function. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Hypovitaminosis (hemeralopia). A therapeutic dose for adult patients is 
up to 10000 IU per day, a prophylaxis dose is 5000 IU per day (1 drop of 
3,44% oil solution contains 5000 IU) 
 
 
Eye diseases (cornea and retina diseases) 
 
Hyperkeratosis, leukoplacia 
 
Skin diseases, burns, frostbites 
 
Chronic inflammations of the bronchi, urinary or bile pathways 
 
Rickets (a complex therapy and prophylaxis) 
 
Pregnancy 
 
Diseases of the mucous membrane of the oral cavity, a complex therapy 
of severe caries. 
 
Side-effects 

Chapter 27.  VITAMINS PREPARATIONS 
397
 
Acute hypervitaminosis: fatigue, headache, sleepiness, nausea, vomiting, 
pho-tophobia, convulsions (resulting from an increase in intracranial pressure). 
 
Chronic hypervitaminosis: weakness, fatigue, sleepiness, nausea, skin 
pigmen-tation, hyperkeratosis, bone pains, the liver and spleen enlargement. 
 
Contraindications 
 
 
Acute diseases of the liver and kidney 
 
 
Heart failure. 
 
RETINOIDS 
 
 
are a class of chemical compounds that are vitamers of vitamin A or are 
chemically related to it. 
 
have many important functions throughout the body including roles in 
vision, regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation, growth of bone 
tissue, immune function, and activation of tumor suppressor genes. 
 
 
there are three generations of retinoids: 1st generation (tretinoin (retinoic 
acid), isotretinoin, and alitretinoin); 2nd generation (etretinate and its me-
tabolite acitretin); 3rd generation (adapalene, bexarotene, and tazarotene). 
 
 
are used in the treatment of many dermatological conditions such as 
inflam-matory skin disorders, skin cancers, psoriasis, acne, photoaging. 
They reduce the risk of head and neck cancers. Isotretinoin is used as 
chemotherapy for leukemia. 
 
 
toxic effects occur with prolonged high intake and are characterized by 
painful tender swellings on the long bones, anorexia, skin lesions, hair 
loss, hepatosplenomegaly, papilloedema, bleeding, general malaise, 
pseudotumor cerebri (hypervitaminosis A syndrome). 
 
 
Systemic retinoids (isotretinoin, etretinate) are contraindicated during 
pregnancy as they may cause CNS, cranio-facial, cardiovascular and 
other defects. 
 
ERGOCALCIFEROL 
 
Vitamin D is a family of substances with an anti-rachitic effect. They have 
steroid structure and are fat-soluble. Ergocalciferol is vitamin D2. Cholecalciferol 
is vitamin D3. Cholecalciferol is synthesized in the skin under the influence of ul-
traviolet rays (fig. 27.4). 

398 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 27.4. Vitamin D and its active forms (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally 
 
 
is absorbed in the intestine with the participation of bile acids 
 
 
is transported to the liver by lymph 
 
 
is transported in connection with transcalciferrine in blood plasma 
 
 
is transformed into calcidiol in the liver and into calcitriol in kidneys 
 
(fig.27.4) 
 
 
is deposited in the liver, mucosa of intestines, and bones 
 
 
is excreted with bile and then is absorbed again 
 
 
finally, is excreted with urine and feces 
 
 
stays in the body for a long time 
 
 
accumulates. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Vitamin D penetrates cell membrane, binds to the receptor in cytoplasma 
and forms the complex “vitamin D–receptor” (fig. 27.5). 
 
 
It is transported to nucleus and changes genes expression. 

Chapter 27.  VITAMINS PREPARATIONS 
399
 
 
As a result, the synthesis of proteins concerning calcium and phosphate 
metabolism is increased. 
 
 
Such events are similar to the mechanism of action of steroid hormones. 
 
 
 
Cytosol 
Nucleus 
Tran- 
scription 
Vit D 
Trans- 
lation 
DNA 
mRNA 
Receptor 
 
 
 
Fig. 27.5. Vitamin’s D mechanism of action (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
Main task of vitamin D is to regulate calcium-phosphor homeostasis and to 
support calcium level in blood (fig. 27.6). According to this purpose, it causes: 
 
 
an increase in calcium and phosphates absorption from the intestine 
 
 
an increase in calcium and phosphates reabsorption in the kidney 
 
an elevation of the level of calcium in blood serum 
 
an increase in fixation of calcium in bone tissue under the conditions of 
the normal calcium level in blood serum, but stimulation of calcium 
mobiliza-tion from bones if the serum calcium level is low 
 
an increase in the calcium influx into nervous cells 
 
an increase in the calcium influx into the cells of skeletal muscles 
 
the stimulation of immunity and regeneration. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Hypovitaminosis: the prophylaxis and treatment of rickets. A prophylaxis 
dose is 500-1000 IU per day; a therapeutic dose is 10000 IU and more per 
day and depends on the severity of vitamin deficiency (1 drop of 0,125% 

400 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Vit. D-Hormone 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ca2+ + PO43– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 27.6. Vitamin D and regulation 
of calcium homeostasis in the body 
(by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
oil solution contains 1250 IU; 1 drop of 0,5% 
alcohol solution – 5000 IU of vitamin D) 
 
 
Osteoporosis 
 
Bone fractures 
 
Caries, disturbances of teeth forming 
 
Skin diseases 
 
Tuberculosis. 
 
Side-effects 
 
Acute 
hypervitaminosis: 
weakness, 
sleepiness, nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia, 
hypotension, arrhythmia, an increase in body 
temperature, an increase in the calcium 
concentration in blood serum, changes in 
urine (protein, cylinders, calcium salts, 
erythrocytes, and leukocytes). 
 
Chronic 
hypervitaminosis: 
bone 
demineralization, calcium deposit in blood 
vessels, the kidney, and other organs (cal-
cinosis), CNS damage, heart insufficiency, 
an increase in BP, an increase in the 
calcium level in blood serum and in urine. 
 
Treatment of D hypervitaminosis 
 
–– Abolishing of drug 
 
–– Antioxidants (vitamins E, C, A) 
 
–– Glucocorticoides 
 
–– Other medications: phenobarbital for the intensification of vitamin D 
biotransformation; solution of sodium bicarbonate for acidosis; prepara-
tions of potassium and magnesium; calcitrin for the prevention of bone 
demineralization. 
 
Contraindications 
 
 
Severe atherosclerosis 
 
 
Elderly age. 
 
α-TOCOPHEROL ACETATE 
 
It belongs to quinons (fig. 27.7), is fat soluble. 

Chapter 27.  VITAMINS PREPARATIONS 
401
 
 
Fig. 27.7. Chemical structure of tocopherol. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally and administered IM; is applied topically 
 
 
is absorbed in the small intestine in the presence of bile acids 
 
 
enters lymph, then blood and is transported with lipoproteins 
 
 
is located in the membranes of cells, the membranes of mitochondria and 
microsomes 
 
 
concentrates in adrenal glands and fat tissue 
 
 
is excreted in an non-transformed status with feces (more than 80% of drug). 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Tocopherol is the strongest bioantioxidant and protects cell membranes 
from free radicals and peroxides 
 
It increases the activity of creatinphosphokinase, cytochrome-C oxidase 
and some other enzymes, stimulates the synthesis of ubiquinon, improves 
tissue respiration 
 
 
Tocopherol increases the secretion of gonadotropines and sexual hormones 
 
 
It increases iron absorption, the synthesis of hem and surphactant in the lungs. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
the regulation of reproduction (the promotion of follicles formation and 
normal development of pregnancy in females; the stimulation of 
spermato-genesis in males) 
 
 
the improvement of skeletal muscles trophy 
 
 
a cardio-protective action 
 
 
an increase in stability to hypoxia 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
the stimulation of erythropoiesis 
 
 
an improvement of reological properties of blood 
 
 
an anti-atherosclerotic action 
 
 
a stress-protective action 
 
 
a hepatoprotective action 
 
 
the stimulation of regeneration. 
 
 
Indications 
 
 
Spontaneous abortions, sexual glands function impairment, climax 
 
 
Myodystrophy 
 
 
Angina pectoris, a omplex therapy of myocardial infarction 
 
 
Atherosclerosis 
 
 
Liver diseases 
 
 
Complex therapy of anemia 
 
 
Diseases of blood vessels 
 
 
Radiation sickness 
 
 
Stress 
 
 
Paradontitis, diseases of the mucous membrane of the oral cavity 
 
 
Hypervitaminosis D. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Creatinuria 
 
 
Very rarely: hepatic disturbances, nausea, headache, an increase in BP (in 
bigger doses). 
 
PHYTOMENADIONE 
 
 
is known as vitamin K1 or phylloquinone, belongs to fat-soluble vitamins. 
 
 
is typically recommended by mouth or SC injection, rarely IV or IM. 
When taken orally, the effect manifests itself after 6-10 hrs (IM for 1 hr) 
and persists for 3-6 hrs. 
 
 
stimulates hepatic biosynthesis of prothrombin (factor II), proconvertin 
(factor VII), plasma thromboplastin component (IX, or Christmas factor), 
Stuart-Prower factor (factor X). It is a cofactor of the microsomal enzymes of 
hepatocytes which catalyze γ -carboxylation of the pro-clotting factors II, 
VII, IX, X, protein C (coagulation inhibitor) and calcium-binding proteins 
(osteocalcin). After the γ-carboxylation of glutaminic acid, functionally 
inactive progenitors acquire antihemorrhagic properties and are secreted 

Chapter 27.  VITAMINS PREPARATIONS 
403
 
into the blood. Vitamin K participates in biosynthesis of ATP and 
creatine 
phosphate, 
activation 
of 
ATPase, 
creatine 
kinase, 
aminotransferases, pan-creatic and intestinal enzymes. 
 
 
is used in hemorrhagic syndrome associated with a deficiency of vitamin 
K1 or violation of its absorption in the gut; an overdose of anticoagulants 
of indirect action (coumarin and indanedione derivatives), salicylates, 
sulfona-mides, and broad-spectrum antibiotics; hemorrhagic disease of 
newborns; prevention of bleeding before operations. 
 
 
can cause such side effects as feeling of heat and redness of the skin, 
altered taste, weakness, tachycardia, sweating, short-term hypotension, 
dyspnoea, cyanosis, allergic reactions, hyperbilirubinemia (in children). 
 
ASCORBIC ACID 
 
Ascorbic acid is a hexose, easily losses the atom of hydrogen and transforms 
into the dehydroascorbic acid (fig. 27.8). It is water-soluble vitamin. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 27.8. Chemical structure of ascorbic acid. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, IM, IV 
 
 
is well absorbed in the intestine 
 
 
vitamin C concentration in erythrocytes and leukocytes is more than that 
in blood serum 
 
 
concentrates in gland tissue, especially in adrenal glands 
 
 
is excreted with urine if the depo is complete. 

404 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
The ascorbic acid is a donator and an acceptor of hydrogen. That is why it 
takes part in oxidation-reduction systems, is a direct-acting antioxidant. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
 
participation in the synthesis of procollagen and collagen 
 
 
providing of the growth of bones, the formation of cartilages and dentine 
 
 
stimulation of regeneration 
 
 
participation in the transformation of the folic acid into the 
tetrahydrofolic acid 
 
 
an increase in the absorption of iron and synthesis of hem 
 
 
participation in the synthesis of adrenal steroids and thyroid hormones 
 
 
participation in the synthesis of catecholamines, activation of sympathetic 
nervous system 
 
 
improvement of immunity and phagocytosis 
 
 
a decrease in the permeability of blood vessels 
 
 
participation in cholesterol metabolism and the inhibition of the develop-
ment of atherosclerosis 
 
 
detoxication of xenobiotics in the liver 
 
 
an increase in resistance to stress and radiation 
 
 
the improvement of adaptation. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Hypovitaminosis (scurvy) 
 
 
Collagenoses 
 
 
Rheumatism 
 
 
Wounds, bone fractures 
 
 
Hemorrhagic diathesis 
 
 
Atherosclerosis 
 
 
Radiation sickness 
 
 
Complex therapy of anemia 
 
 
Infections 
 
 
Acute and chronic intoxications 
 
 
The stimulation of protective powers of the organism and the 
improvement of adaptation 
 
 
Bleeding gums, paradontitis, a complex therapy of severe caries. 

Chapter 27.  VITAMINS PREPARATIONS 
405
 
 
Side-effects 
 
Side-effects only occure in bigger doses of vitamin C: 
 
 
A decrease in the secretion of insulin 
 
 
Renal concrements 
 
 
An increase in BP 
 
 
A decrease in permeability of blood-tissue barriers 
 
 
Hypercoagulation of blood. 
 
RUTIN 
 
 
is a water-soluble membrane-tropic vitamin, a flavonoid 
 
 
is taken orally 
 
 
is an antioxidant; protects the ascorbic acid and epinephrine from oxidation, 
participates in oxidation-reduction processes, inhibits hyaluronidase activity, 
decreases the permeability of the blood vessels wall 
 
 
is used together with the ascorbic acid in vasculitis, hemorrhagic 
diathesis, rheumatism, collagenosis, radiation sickness, atherosclerosis, 
infections, paradontitis. 
 
CALCIUM PANGAMATE 
 
 
is a water-soluble membrane-tropic vitamin, a derivative of gluconic acid 
and dimethylglycine 
 
is taken orally 
 
 
has the mechanism of action connected with the ability to be a donator of 
active methyl groups 
 
improves lipids metabolism; enhances oxygen utilization in tissues; 
increases the concentration of creatin phosphate and glycogen in skeletal 
muscles and the liver; decreases hypoxia; has neuroprotective, 
cardioprotective, antihy-poxic, antidystrophic, hepatoproptective effects; 
decreases side-effects of sulfa drugs and corticosteroids 
 
 
is used to treat atherosclerosis, especially atherosclerosis of arteria in the 
lower extremities, emphysema of the lungs, pneumosclerosis, chronic 
hepatitis, chronic alcoholism, skin diseases; may be applied to improve 
the tolerance to sulfa drugs and adrenal steroids 
 
 
may cause allergy, abdominal pain. 
 
CO-ENZYMIC VITANINS PREPARATIONS 

406 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Co-enzymic vitamins preparations are water-soluble ones. They are also 
named “complex B vitamins” (fig. 27.9). 
 
The main hypovitaminoses and avitaminoses caused by deficit of co-
enzymic vitanins are: 
 
 
Thiamine deficiency – beri-beri (polyneuritis, CHF, psychic disturbances; 
in babies – heart failure, tachycardia, seizures, vomiting, anorexia, 
nervous excitement) 
 
 
Riboflavin deficiency – ariboflavinosis (cheilosis, angular stomatitis, 
perio-ral dermatitis, photophobia, conjunctivitis) 
 
Nicotinic acid deficiency – pellagra (dermatitis, diarrhea, dementia, dys-
trophy) 
 
Pyridoxine deficiency – microcytic anemia, may be secondary pellagra, 
neuropathy, depression, in babies – anemia, hypotrophy, seizures, meteorism 
 
 
Cyanocobalamin deficiency – megaloblastic anemia (hyperchromic 
anemia, crimson tongue, atrophic glossitis, parasthesia, ataxia). 
 
 
COMPLEX B VITAMINS 
 
Thiamine chloride (or bromide) 
 
Riboflavin 
 
Nicotinic acid 
 
Calcium pantothenate 
 
Pyridoxine hydrochloride 
 
Cyanocobalamin 
 
Folic acid 
 
Fig. 27.9. Vitamins preparations of B complex. 
 
THIAMINE CHLORIDE 
 
It is co-enzymic water-soluble vitamin from B complex. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, IM, SC, IV 
 
 
is absorbed in the small intestine 

Chapter 27.  VITAMINS PREPARATIONS 
407
 
 
is phosphorilized in the liver and transformed into cocarboxylase 
 
 
concentrates in the liver, heart, brain, and kidney 
 
 
is excreted with urine. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Active form of vitamin B1 is a co-enzyme of decarboxylase and takes 
part in the oxidative decarboxilation of α-ketoacids (fig. 27.10). 
 
 
In such a way it stimulates the forming of piruvic acid and decreases the 
lactate level. 
 
It is a co-enzyme of transketolase and takes part in a pentosophosphaste 
way of glucose metabolism. 
 
B1 stimulates synthesis of acetylcholine. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 27.10. Active form of thiamine is for oxidative decarboxilation of α-ketoacids: 
 
acid residue is shown on the left (by J. Musil et all, 1980). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
Indications 
 
Neurotropic effect: it improves impulses conduction in 
 
nervous fibers, decreases pain, has ganglia blocking ac- 
 
tion, decreases the action of depolarized myorelaxants 
 
Cardiotropic effect: it widens coronary vessels, im- 
 
proves the trophy of the myocardium, increases contrac- 
 
tility, normalizes the heart rate, improves the oxygena- 
 
tion of the heart muscle, increases the action of cardiac 
 
glycosides 
 
Hypoglycemic effect: it improves the utilization of 
 
glucose, is a synergist of insulin. 
 
Hypovitaminosis (beri- 
 
beri) 
 
Polyneuritis, radiculi- 
 
tis, neuralgia 
 
Chronic heart failure, 
 
arrhythmia 
 
Diabetes mellitus 
 
Ulcer of the stomach 
 
and duodenum 
 
Skin diseases. 

408 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Allergic reactions, anaphylactic shock 
 
 
Lethargy, ataxia, nausea, hypotension (in overdose). 
 
Contraindications 
 
Should not be used in allergy to B1, as well as together with pyridoxine (resulting 
in disorders of phosphorilizing) or cyanocobalamin (resulting in allergy). 
COCARBOXYLASE 
 
Cocarboxylase is an active form of vitamin B1; is a dry substance in ampoules for IM 
and IV administration; is used for the treatment of acidosis, diabetes mellitus, diabetic 
coma, hepatic coma, renal failure, chronic heart failure, arrhythmia, diseases of CNS. 
 
RIBOFLAVIN 
 
It is a co-enzymic water-soluble vitamin from B complex. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally and applied topically as eye drops 
 
 
is absorbed in the small intestine 
 
 
is phosphorilized in the intestine, in the liver, and erythrocytes 
 
 
concentrates in the liver and kidneys 
 
 
is excreted with urine and colored urine in light yellow color. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Active forms are FAD (flavin-adenine-dinucleotide) and FMN (flavin-monu-
cleotide). They are co-enzymes of flavin enzymes which take part in the H+ 
transport chain in tissue respiration (fig. 27.11). 

Chapter 27.  VITAMINS PREPARATIONS 
409
  
Fig. 27.11. Active forms of vitamins B2 and PP participated 
in tissue H+ and e- transport (by J. Musil et all, 1980). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
Indications 
 
The improvement of trophy of the eye 
 
and function of vision 
 
The stimulation of the regeneration of 
 
epithelium 
 
The stimulation of hemopoesis 
 
An increase in stability to hypoxia 
 
The stimulation of gastric secretion 
 
A decrease in cardiac glycosides 
 
toxicity. 
 
Hypovitaminosis (heilosis, glossitis, 
 
photophobia) 
 
Eye diseases (keratitis, conjunctivitis) 
 
Skin diseases 
 
Radiation sickness 
 
Anemia 
 
Asthenia 
 
Liver diseases 
 
Heilosis, angular stomatitis. 
 
Side-effects 
 
None recorded. 
 
NICOTINIC ACID 
 
It is a co-enzymic water-soluble vitamin from B-complex. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally and administered IM, SC, IV 
 
 
is absorbed in the small intestine 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
is transformed into the active forms in the liver 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver 
 
 
is excreted with urine. 
 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
The active forms are NAD (nicotine-amide-dinucleotide) and NADP 
(nicotine-amide-dinucleotide phosphate). They take part in the electron transport 
chain in tissue respiration (fig. 27.11), are acceptors of H+ 
 
Vitamin PP active forms participate in the synthesis of amino acids, 
neurotrans-mitters, cholesterol, bile acids, steroid hormones, etc. 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
Neurotropic effect: it inhibits CNS activity, inter- 
 
acts with benzodiazepine receptors, stimulates the 
 
synthesis of neurotransmitters, has sedative and anti- 
 
epileptic properties 
 
Cardiotrophic effect 
 
The improvement of the skin trophy 
 
The improvement of the liver function 
 
Hypolipidemic action: it decreases triglycerids, cho- 
 
lesterol, and LDL level in blood (in a bigger dose) 
 
Vasodilatation (in a bigger dose) 
 
Activation of fibrinolysis and an anti-platelet action 
 
(in a bigger dose) 
 
Stimulation of the gut’s activity. 
 
Indications 
 
Hypovitaminosis (pel- 
 
lagra) 
 
Diseases of the skin and 
 
mucous membrane 
 
Liver diseases 
 
Atherosclerosis 
 
Spasms of blood vessels 
 
Gastritis, gastric ulcer 
 
Radiation sickness. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Skin hyperemia, itch, hypotension (flush-syndrome) 
 
 
A loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting 
 
 
Lipid liver infiltration. 
 
CALCIUM PANTOTHENATE 
 
 
is administered orally, parenteraly and applied topically 
 
 
takes part in the formation of co-enzyme A and acyl carrier protein. In 
such a way it participates in the synthesis of acetylcholine, 
corticosteroids, in the metabolism of fatty acids and the citric acid 

Chapter 27.  VITAMINS PREPARATIONS 
411
 
 
improves neurotransmission, increases skin trophy and regeneration, 
stimulates the activity of the intestine, increases the effectiveness of 
cardiac glycosides, decreases the toxicity of streptomycin 
 
 
is indicated in neuritis, neuralgia, skin diseases, wounds, burns, allergic 
reactions, bronchial asthma, diseases of the upper respiratory pathways, 
heart failure, atonia of intestine, toxicosis of pregnancy 
 
 
has minimal side-effects (nausea, vomiting). 
 
PYRIDOXINE HYDROCHLORIDE 
 
It is a co-enzymic water-soluble vitamin from B complex. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, SC, IM 
 
 
is absorbed in a connective status, is liberated from this status under the 
influence of digestive juices and absorbed again 
 
 
is phosphorilized in the tissues 
 
 
is oxidized and excreted with urine. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Vitamin B6 exists in three forms: pyridoxine, pyridoxamine, pyridoxal. 
Pyridoxalphosphate is the active form (fig. 27.12) 
 
It takes part in the transamination, desamination, and decarboxylation of 
amino acids. 
 
Vitamin B6 participates in the synthesis of dopamine, histamine, amino-
levulinic acid, serotonin, GABA, glutaminic acid. 
 
 
It promotes the transition of linoleic acid into arachidonic acid. 

412 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 27.12. Active form of pyridoxine and groups which are transported 
 
by it (at left) (by J. Musil et all, 1980). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
Neurotropic effect: increases synbthesis 
of neurotransmitters in CNS, improves 
func-tions of the brain, decreases epileptic 
activ-ity, interacts with anti-parkinsoian 
drugs Cardiotrophic effect: it improves 
the trophy of the myocardium, has 
positive inotropic and negative 
chronotropic effect Hepatotrophic effect: 
it activates the secretion of bile, 
biosynthesis of glycogen and proteins, 
improves desintoxication in the liver 
 
Stimulation of hemopoiesis: it 
activates the synthesis of hem and 
forming of leukocytes. 
 
Indications 
 
Hypovitaminosis (normochromic 
microcytes anemia) 
 
Neuritis, radiculitis 
 
Chorea, Parkinson’s disease, 
epilepsy Myocardiodystrophy, 
chronic heart failure 
 
Liver diseases 
 
Chronic alcoholism 
 
Gestational toxicosis 
 
Anemia, leukopenia, aplastic 
anemia Radiation sickness 
 
Prophylaxis and the treatment of 
side-effects of antimycobacterial 
drugs, hormonal contraceptives 
and some other drugs. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Allergy 
 
 
A reduce of prolactin secretion. 
 
 
Damage of sensor nerves and the liver. 

Chapter 27.  VITAMINS PREPARATIONS 
413
 
 
CYANOCOBALAMIN 
 
It is a water-soluble co-enzymic vitamin of B complex. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally, administered IM, IV 
 
 
after the oral administration, binds to the intrinsic Castle factor in the sto- 
mach and is absorbed in the intestine by endocytosis 
 
concentrates in the liver 
 
 
is biotransformated to deoxyadenosylcobalamine and methylcobalamine. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Active form of cyanocobalamin is a co-factor of the folic acid reductase (fig. 
27.13). 
 
It takes part in the synthesis of purine and pyrimidine nucleotides and 
transforms megaloblastic hemopoiesis into normoblastic one. 
 
It takes part in the synthesis of myeline and acetylcholine. 
 
Cyanocobalamin participates in the synthesis of thiol compounds, 
methionine, choline, as well as in lipid metabolism (it increases lipids fixation in 
children and promotes lipids mobilization in adults). 
 
Pharmacodynamics 
 
The regulation of hemopoiesis, the 
transformation of megaloblastic 
hemopoiesis into normoblastic one; 
the improvement of the formation 
of erythrocytes, leukocytes, and 
throm-bocytes 
 
The regulation of the epithelium 
forming The improvement of the 
neurotrans-mission and functions of 
nervous system 
 
The stimulation of regeneration 
and growth 
 
Indications 
 
Hypovitaminosis (megaloblastic anemia, 
 
glossitis, myelosis) 
 
Radiation sickness 
 
Neuritis, neuralgia, radiculitis, 
neurologi-cal diseases of the spinal cord 
and the brain 
 
Liver diseases 
 
Hypotrophy in children 
 
Glossitis, stomatitis. 

414 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 27.13. Active form of cyanocobalamin and methyl 
 
group transported by it (on the left) (by J. Musil et all, 1980). 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Allergy 
 
 
Hypercoagulation 
 
 
Tachycardia, pain in the heart, the aggravation of angina pectoris. 
 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity, thrombosis, thromboembolism. 
 
The drug should not be administered together with vitamins B1 and B6 due to 
an increase in allergy. 
 
FOLIC ACID 
 
 
is water-soluble vitamin 
 
 
is taken orally 
 
 
takes part in the synthesis of purine and pyrimidine nucleotides, amino 
acids and proteins 
 
 
is an additional remedy in the treatment of hyperchomic megaloblastic 
anemia; is used together with cyanocobalamin; is also indicated in 
chronic gastro-enteritis, sprue, in pregnancy for the prophylaxis of 
neurological pathology of the fetus and newborn. 

Chapter 27.  VITAMINS PREPARATIONS 
415
 
MULTIVITAMIN DRUGS 
 
 
are complexes of fat- and water-soluble vitamins for the oral administration 
 
 
contain doses of vitamins which are equal their day requirement 
 
 
are used for the prophylaxis of hypovitaminosis and for the adaptation 
therapy 
 
 
may cause overdose due to the presence of vitamins A and D in 
multivitamin drugs, if they are used uncorrectly. 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
 
1. All the statements regarding vitamins preparations are correct, except: 
 
A. Ascorbic acid and tocopherol acetate are antioxidants 
 
В. Riboflavin and the nicotinic acid take part in tissue respiration 
C. Thiamine chloride regulates calcium homeostasis 
 
D. Cyancobalamin and the folic acid transform megaloblastic hemopoiesis 
into normoblastic one 
 
E.  Calcium panthotenate improves regeneration and skin trophy. 
 
 
2. Rutin is: 
 
 
A multivitamin drug 
В. A fat-soluble vitamin 
 
C.  A stimulant of bone mineralization 
 
D. An antioxidant which decreases blood vessels wall permeability 
E. A constituent of rhodopsin. 
 
 
3. Ergocalciferol has following effects: 
 
 
Stimulates calcium absorption in the GI tract 
 
 
Stimulates calcium reabsorption in the kidney 
 
 
Stimulates resorption of bones 
 
 
Inhibits bones resorption 
 
 
Supplies calcium level in blood. 
 
 
4. Processes with the participation of the ascorbic acid are: 
 
A. The synthesis of glucocorticoids 
B. The synthesis of catecholamines 
C. The absorption of calcium 
 
D. The synthesis of procollagen 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
E.  The resorption of bone tissue. 
 
 
 
5. A patient has disturbances of vision (hemeralopia), xerophthalmia, 
xeros-tomia, dry skin, and hypochromic anemia. Point a correct 
diagnosis and basic preparation for the therapy. 
 
 
Rickets and ergocalciferol 
 
 
Megaloblastic anemia and cyanocobalamin 
 
 
Malaria and chloroquine 
 
 
Hyperthyroidism and methimazole 
 
 
Hypovitaminosis of vitamin A and retinol acetate. 
 
Answers: 
 
№ 1 – C; № 2 – D; № 3 – A, B, D, E; № 4 – A, B, D; № 5 – E. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
ACIDS, ALKALIS, SALTS. 
DRUGS FOR TREATMENT OF 
28 OSTEOPOROSIS. ENZYMES AND 
ENZYME INHIBITORS. 
GLUCOSE. PREPARATIONS 
FOR TRANSFUSION THERAPY 
 
 
 
 
ACIDS 
 
Acids are electrolytes which dissociate with the formation of H+ ions. They 
are non-organic and organic acids. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Hydrochloride acid (HCl) is a normal constituent of gastric juice. It is neces-sary 
for a normal function of pepsin, for the absorption of iron, and the supporting of 
normal microbial status in the stomach. 2% solution of HCl is used orally as a 
replacing therapy in hypoacidic gastritis, achilia and together with iron preparations. 
 
Boric acid is an antiseptic. It is used topically to treat purulent wounds, 
burns, skin diseases, eye infections. 
Salicylic acid is also an antiseptic. In high concentration, it has a keratolytic 
action, in low concentration – a keratoplastic one; is used to treat skin diseases. 
 
Acute poisoning with acids 
 
Signs: the coagulation necrosis of the skin or mucous membrane, acute pain in 
the mouth, gullet, the stomach, vomiting with admixtures of blood, acidosis, shock. 
 
Emergency help: 
 
–– lavage of the stomach with cold water 
–– neutralization of the acid and the protection of the gastric mucosa 
(magne-sium oxide, egg albumin, milk) 

418 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
–– neutralization of the acid by weak solution of alkali on the surface of the 
skin or mucous membrane 
–– IV administration of sodium bicarbonate 
–– narcotic analgesics. 
 
ALKALIS (BASES) 
 
Bases are electrolytes dissociated the with formation of OH- ions. They 
include solution of ammonia, sodium bicarbonate, and magnesium oxide. 
 
SODIUM BICARBONATE 
 
 
is administered orally, by IV infusion, by inhalation, rectally, or topically 
 
causes the alkalinization of body fluids, decreases the acidity 
 
decreases the acidity of gastric juice (after the oral administration), 
decreases acidosis, has expectorant, anti-arrhythmic and antihypertensive 
actions, antiseptic and osmotic effects (locally) 
 
is used to treat acidosis, hyperacidic gastritis, bronchitis, purulent 
diseases in the oral cavity and throat, hypersensitivity of the teeth enamel 
 
may cause side-effects, such as alkalosis, the formation of CO2 during an antacid 
action in the stomach that may produce a secondary stimulation of gastric secretion 
and a rupture of the stomach wall in patients suffering from peptic ulcer disease. 
 
Peculiarities of other preparations 
 
Magnesium oxide is taken orally for an antacid action in the stomach (the 
antacid effect is without CO2 formation); is used to treat hyperacidic gastritis, may 
cause a weak laxative action. 
 
A solution of ammonia is an antiseptic. It is used for the processing of the 
surgeon’s hands. It is an irritable agent and may cause the reflexive stimulation of 
respiration in syncope. High concentration of the vapor of ammonia causes the ir-
ritation and burn of the upper respiratory pathways, provokes a respiratory arrest. 
 
Acute poisoning with alkalis 
 
Signs: a colliquation necrosis of the skin or mucous membrane, acute pain in the 
mouth, gullet, and stomach, vomiting with admixtures of blood, excitation, shock. 
 
Emergency help: 
 
–– the avage of the stomach with cold water 
–– coverings (egg albumin, milk) –– 
narcotic analgesics 
–– neutralization by a weak solution of the acid on the surface of the skin or 
mucous membrane. 

Chapter 28.
 
ACIDS, ALKALIS, SALTS. ENZYMES AND ENZYME INHIBITORS
 
419 
 
 
SALTS OF ALKALINE AND 
ALKALINE-EARTH METALS 
 
Salts are electrolytes which dissociate into the ions of metal and acid (fig.28.1). 
 
 
SALTS OF ALKALINE AND 
 
ALKALINE-EARTH METALS 
 
 
 
Salts of sodium 
 
Salts of potassium 
 
Salts of calcium 
 
Salts of magnesium 
 
Fig. 28.1. Main groups of salts used in a clinic. 
 
SODIUM CHLORIDE 
 
 
ions of Na+ are the main extracellular ions in the body which influence osmotic 
pressure, electrolyte balance, and volume of circulating blood, take part in 
polarization and depolarization of cell membranes, participates in the neu-
rotransmission, contractions and tone of the muscles, synthesis of hormones 
 
isotonic (0,9%) solution of sodium chloride is administered by IV 
infusion for the treatment of dehydratation in cases of vomiting, diarrhea, 
intoxica-tions, hemorrhages, for forced diuresis; is used to dissolve other 
drugs and to irrigate wounds, cavities, eyes 
 
hypertonic (2-10%) solution of sodium chloride has an antiseptic and osmotic 
action; is used topically for the treatment of purulent wounds or administered 
 
IV for the stopping of the lung and stomach bleeding. 
 
POTASSIUM CHLORIDE 
 
 
ions of K+ are the main intracellular ions which take part in polarization/ 
depolarization 
processes 
in 
cell 
membranes, 
neurotransmission, 
supporting of the heart rhythm and normal function of skeletal muscles 
 
is administered IV or by mouth, has a short duration of action 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
is used to treat hypokalemia, arrhythmia, myastenia gravis, acute poison-ing 
with cardiac glycosides; to prevent hypokalemia caused by some drugs 
 
(cardiac glycosides, glucocorticoids, diuretics) 
 
may cause hyperkalemia. 
 
Asparkam (Panangin) is a combined potassium preparation which contains 
asparaginates of potassium and magnesium; its properties and indications are the 
same as the properties of potassium chloride. 
 
CALCIUM CHLORIDE 
 
 
Ca++ions regulate the functions of CNS and autonomic nervous system, 
stimulate sympathetic activity, participate in blood coagulation, decrease 
blood vessels permeability, inhibit allergic reactions and inflammation, 
take part in the formation of bones and teeth 
 
is administered IV, rarely is taken by mouth in the form of solution, in 
dentistry is used topically (applications, electrophoresis) 
 
is used for hypocalcemia, tetania and spasmophylia, allergic reactions, in-
flammations, bleedings and their prophylaxis, vasculitis, acute 
intoxications with fluorides, oxalates, magnesium salts 
 
may cause the necrosis of soft tissues if is administered SC or IM, 
irritates the gastric mucous membrane. 
 
Peculiarities of other calcium preparations 
 
Calcium gluconate is similar to calcium chloride in its pharmacological 
activity, but is administered IV, IM, and orally (in the form of tablets), is often 
used to treat bone fractures, osteoporosis, to prevent rickets and osteoporosis 
under the conditions of immobilization. 
Calcium glycerophosphate contains calcium and phosphor, improves the 
min-eralization of bones and teeth, has an anabolic action, is used orally for the 
treatment of bone fractures, osteoporosis. 
 
MAGNESIUM SULFATE 
 
 
is administered IV, IM, orally 
 
is an antagonist of calcium ions in the cell 
 
after parenteral administration, has sedative, hypnotic and narcosis actions; 
inhibition of the vasomotor center; an anti-seizure action; the dilation of blood 
vessels and a decrease in BP; an anti-arrhythmic action; the dehydratation- of 
tissues; a diuretic action; a decrease in intracranial pressure; a spasmolytic action; 
an antidote effect in acute poisoning with compounds of calcium 
 
 
after the oral the administration, acts as a laxative 

Chapter 28.
 
ACIDS, ALKALIS, SALTS. ENZYMES AND ENZYME INHIBITORS
 
421 
 
 
 
is used for hypertensive emergency, chronic hypertension, a seizures attack, 
edema of the brain, tachyarrhythmia, myocardial infarction, toxicosis of 
pregnancy overdose of calcium preparations, acute constipation 
 
 
may cause side-effects, such as pain and infiltrate in the site of adminis-
tration (IM); suppression of respiration (IV). If suppression of respiration 
occurs, calcium chloride (IV) and carbogenum (inhalation) should be used. 
 
DRUGS FOR TREATMENT OF OSTEOPOROSIS 
 
Osteoporosis is a condition of skeletal fragility due to progressive loss of 
bone mass. It is characterized by frequent bone fractures, which are a major cause 
of dis-ability among the elderly, especially among postmenopausal women. 
 
New options in pharmacological management of osteoporosis are connected 
with bisphosphonates, selective estrogen-receptor modulators, calcitonin and 
teriparatide. Preparations of calcium and strontium, salts of fluorine, vitamin D 
preparations also may be used in patients with osteoporosis. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Bisphosphonates (etidronate, risedronate, zoledronic acid) are the analogs of 
pyrophosphate, They decrease osteoclastic bone resorption via 1) inhibition of the osteo-
clastic proton pump necessary for dissolution of hydroxyapatite, 2) decrease in osteoclastic 
formation/activation, 3) increase in osteoclastic apoptosis, 4) inhibition of the cholesterol 
biosynthetic pathway important for osteoclast function. Bisphosphonates are preferred 
agents for the prevention and treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. They may be used 
for treatment of bone metastases and hypercalcemia of malignancy. Side-effects include 
diarrhea, abdominal pain, and musculoskeletal pain, esophagitis and esophageal ulcers. 
 
Selective estrogen-receptor modulators. Estrogen replacement is an effective 
therapy for the prevention of postmenopausal bone loss, but it has some limitations due 
to serious side-effects. Raloxifene is a selective estrogen-receptor modulator. It 
increases bone density without increasing the risk of endometrial cancer and may 
reduce the risk of breast cancer. Raloxifene is a first-line alternative for postmeno-
pausal osteoporosis in women who are intolerant to bisphosphonates. 
 
Calcitonin (intranasally) is effective and well tolerated in the treatment of 
postmenopausal osteoporosis. The drug reduces bone resorption, but it is less 
effec-tive than the bisphosphonates. A unique property of calcitonin is the relief of 
pain associated with osteoporotic fracture. 
Teriparatide is a recombinant segment of human parathyroid hormone. This 
hormone given continuously leads to dissolution of bone, but when it is given SC 
once daily, bone formation is the predominant effect. The safety and efficacy of 
this agent have not been evaluated beyond 2 years. Teriparatide is an alternative 
prepara-tion for patients who cannot tolerate other osteoporosis therapies. 

422 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
ENZYMES AND INHIBITORS OF ENZYMES 
 
ENZYMES 
 
Enzymes are preparations which play the role of the biological catalyzers of 
metabolism in the organism. Enzymes, catallyzing the restriction of different sub-
strates (fig. 28.2), are of great importance for a clinic. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 28.2. Restriction of substrate by enzyme (http://www.picsearch.com). 
 
Classification 
 
 Peptidases and proteases 
–  Pepsin 
–  Trypsin 
–  Chymotrypsin 
 Nucleases 
–  Ribonuclease 
–  Desoxyribonuclease 
 Preparations of hyaluronidase 
–  Lidase 
–  Ronidase 
 Fibrinolytic enzymes 
–  Fibrinolysin 
–  Streptolyase 
 Enzymes of another action 
–  L-asparaginase 
–  Penicillinase 
 Combined polyenzyme preparations 
–  Pancreatin 
– Creon 
– Festal 
 
– Wobenzym. 

Chapter 28.
 
ACIDS, ALKALIS, SALTS. ENZYMES AND ENZYME INHIBITORS
 
423 
 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Pepsin is a normal constituent of gastric juice; is active in an acidic pH and 
tears peptide connections; is taken orally together with hydrochloride acid to treat 
hypoacidic and anacidic gastritis, achilia, dyspepsia. 
 
Trypsin is obtained from the pancreas of horned cattle, is administered IM, in 
cavities, by inhalation, or topically; splits peptones, that’s why decreases the density of 
pus and exudation, improves the clean of wounds and bronchi, decreases edema and 
inflammation; is used to treat purulent wounds, purulent diseases of the lungs, bronchi, 
and pleura, osteomyelitis; may cause an allergic reaction, fever, chill. 
 
Chymotrypsin is a protease similar to trypsin; is more stable in the body. 
Ribonuclease is a nuclease obtained from the pancreas of horned cattle; the 
 
mechanism of action is connected with the restriction of RNA to oligonucleotides; 
in such a way it decreases the viscosity of pus and exudation, improves the clean 
of wounds, cavities, and bronchi; has indications similar to indications of trypsin. 
 
Desoxyribonuclease is also a nuclease, but its action is connected with the 
depolymerization and restriction of DNA. 
 
Lydase contains hyaluronidase; depolimerazes hyaluronic acid and decreases 
the viscosity of connected tissue, increases tissues permeability and the 
penetration of other drugs; is used to treat contractures of joints, scars after burns 
and surgeries, hematomas, chronic inflammation; may cause allergy. 
 
Ronidase is hyaluronidase preparation; its pharmacological properties are 
close to lidase, but it has a lower degree of purification and is used only locally in 
the form of wet bandages for the treatment of contractures of joints, scarring, 
hematoma, chronic tendovaginitis, wounds that do not heal for a long time. 
 
Pancreatin is a polyenzyme preparation that improves digestion. It contains 
trypsin, amylase and lipase. In diseases of the pancreas, the drug compensates for 
the lack of its external secretory function and improves digestion. Pancreatine is 
prescribed for chronic pancreatitis, cystic fibrosis, chronic inflammatory-
dystrophic diseases of the stomach, intestine, liver, gall bladder. The drug can be 
used in people with normal function of the GI tract in case of errors in nutrition. 
 
Creon is original form of pancreatin. Its capsules contain pancreatin in mini-
microspheres resistant to gastric juice. The drug provides physiological digestive 
process and avoids loss of enzyme activity. Indications for the use of creone, as well as 
for pancreatin, are diseases that are accompanied by exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. 
 
Festal is a polyenzyme drug for improving digestion. It contains pancreatic 
enzymes (protease, amylase, lipase) and bile components. The presence of bile com-
ponents stimulates the secretion of bile and promotes emulsification of fats making 
them more accessible to pancreatic lipase. Festal has advantages in cases where the 
lack of external secretory function of the pancreas is combined with biliary disorders. 

424 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Wobenzym is a polyenzyme drug for systemic enzymotherapy, that is a resorptive 
action of the complex of hydrolytic enzymes of plant and animal origin on patho-
physiological processes. It contains pancreatin, papain, bromelain, lipase, amylase, 
trypsin, and chymotrypsin. After oral administration, part of the enzymes is absorbed 
in the small intestine and enter the blood, the rest is involved in digestion. In the blood, 
the proteolytic enzymes bind to α2-macroglobulin and transported to damaged tissues, 
where they realize their therapeutic effect. The drug has anti-inflammatory, 
immunomodulatory and fibrinolytic properties. It is used as a non-specific component 
of therapy for cronic inflammations of the respiratory system, pancreatitis, ulcerative 
colitis, multiple sclerosis, coronary heart disease, rheumatoid arthritis, rheumatism, 
etc. During the treatment, dyspeptic phenomena and allergic reactions are possible. 
 
INHIBITORS OF ENZYMES 
 
Inhibitors of enzymes are drugs inhibiting the activity of different enzymes. 
Among them there are inhibitors of proteolysis and fiibrinolysis (Aprotinin, 
Contrykal, Aminocaproic acid) and inhibitors of lipases (Orlistat). 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Contrykal is a natural substance with short time of action; is administered IV, by IV 
infusion, or applied topically (in dentistry); inhibits the activity of trypsin and plasmin, has 
a direct action on proteolytic enzymes, decreases proteolysis and fibrinolisis, has anti-
inflammatory properties; is indicated in acute pancreatitis, surgeries on the pan-creas, lungs, 
and glands, bleeding due to an increased fibrinolysis, obstetrics pathology. 
 
Aminocaproic acid is used orally, by IV infusion, and topically (in dentistry); 
inhibits the activity of trypsin and plasmin; has a direct + indirect action, decreases 
proteolysis and fibrinolisis, has anti-inflammatory properties, decreases allergy and 
intoxication; has the indications similar to the indications of contrykal. Both prepa-
rations are also described in Chapters 22, 28. Orlistat is a pentanoic acid ester that 
inhibits gastric and pancreatic lipases, thus decreasing the breakdown of dietary fat 
into smaller molecules that can be absorbed. Fat absorption is decreased that leads to 
weight loss. Orlistat is used as anti-obesity drug. Side-effects are gastrointestinal 
symptoms, such as oily spotting, flatulence with discharge, fecal urgency, and 
increased defecation. It interferes with the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins. Orlistat 
is contraindicated in patients with malabsorption syndrome and cholestasis. 
 
GLUCOSE 
 
 
is administered IV,SC, orally 
 
isotonic 5% solution of glucose is used for an increase of fluids volume, 
as a energetic source, as a solvent for other drugs 
 
 
hypertonic 40% solution increases osmotic pressure, improves antitoxic 
liver function, and contractility of myocardium, decreases permeability of 

Chapter 28.
 
ACIDS, ALKALIS, SALTS. ENZYMES AND ENZYME INHIBITORS
 
425 
 
 
blood vessels; is used to treat hypoglycemia, hypotension, asthenia, liver 
diseases, heart failure, to dissolve some other drugs. 
 
is an ingredient of many tablets and dosed powders 
 
may cause hyperglycemia 
 
is contraindicated in diabetes mellitus. 
 
DRUGS FOR TRANSFUSION THERAPY 
 
Drugs for transfusion therapy are solutions for IV infusions. 
 
Classification 
 
 Low weight solutions 
–  0,9% solution of sodium chloride 
–  4% solution of sodium bicarbonate 
–  5% solution of glucose 
–  Ringer-Lock solution 
–  Trisol 
–  Trasamine 
 Plasma substitutes and hemodynamic solutions 
–  Albumin 
–  Rheopolyglukin 
–  Refortan 
 Detoxification drugs 
–  Neohemodez 
 Drugs for IV nutrition 
–  Aminosteril 
–  Lipofundin. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Low weight solutions are used for rehydratation, the restoration of the acid-base 
balance, hemodilution under the conditions of acute poisoning, diabetic coma, etc. 
Ringer-Lock solution is a multicomponent physiological solution of sodium 
chloride (9 g/l), potassium chloride (0.2 g/l), calcium chloride (0.2 g/l), sodium 
bicarbonate (0.2 g/l), and glucose (1 g/l). It compensates for losses of extracellular 
fluid and basic electrolytes; is administered by IV infusion from 500 to 1000 ml 
per day. The drug is used for dehydration of various genesis, hyponatremia, 
hypovolemic shock, metabolic acidosis with loss of fluid. Indications for the use 
are shock, col-lapse, burns, prolonged vomiting, and diarrhea. 
 
Trisol is a multicomponent physiological solution. It contains sodium 
chloride (5 g), potassium chloride (1 g), sodium bicarbonate (4 g), and water for 
injection (up to 1 l) and is used by IV infusion to reduce dehydration and 
intoxication similar to Ringer-Lock solution. 

426 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Trisamine is 3.66% solution of trometamol. It has buffer properties, reduces the 
concentration of hydrogen ions and increases the alkaline reserve of blood, eliminates 
acidosis; unlike sodium bicarbonate, does not increase the concentration of CO2 in the 
blood. Penetrating through cell membranes, it is able to eliminate intracellular acidosis, 
has a hypoglycemic and osmotic diuretic effect. Indications for use include diseases 
accompanied by metabolic and mixed acidosis (shock, massive blood transfu-sion, 
extracorporeal blood circulation, burns, peritonitis, acute pancreatitis), diabetic 
ketoacidosis, poisonings with salicylates, hypnotics, derivatives of barbituric acid, or 
methyl alcohol. The drug can cause inhibition of the respiratory center, lowering of 
BP, hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, hypokalemia, dyspeptic disorders, local reactions in 
the site of administration (venous spasm, phlebitis). 
 
Plasma substitutes and hemodynamic solutions restore the volume of 
circulat-ing blood, support colloid-osmotic pressure, increase BP, improve 
reological blood properties; are used in shock. 
 
Refortan is a colloidal plasma substitute with hydroxyethyl starch in the isotonic 
solution of sodium chloride. The maximal level in the blood plasma is halved after 5-6 
hrs after the end of the infusion. Refortan is continuously cleaved with serum amylase 
and excreted by the kidneys. It is used to treat hypovolemia caused by acute blood 
loss, in cases where the use of only crystalloids is considered insufficient. The drug has 
numerous contraindications: hypersensitivity; sepsis; burns; renal failure; intracranial 
hemorrhage; critical state of patients; hypervolemia; severe coagulopathy; 
hypokalemia, severe disturbances of water-electrolate balance; CHF; severe viola-tions 
of liver function; condition after organ transplantation. Possible side effects are a 
decrease in hematocrit and protein level in the blood, liver damage. itch of the skin, 
pain in the kidney area, and anaphylactic reactions. 
 
Rheopolyglukin is 10% colloidal dextran solution with the addition of isotonic 
sodium chloride solution or 5% glucose solution (two medicinal forms). It is plasma 
substitute solution, the effect of which is to promote the enter of water into the blood 
vessels, reduce the viscosity of the blood, restore blood flow in small capillaries, 
prevent and eliminate the aggregation of blood cells. With a rapid transfusion, the 
volume of plasma can increase almost 2 times compared with the volume of the 
injected drug. Half-life is about 6 hrs; the main part of the drug is excreted by the 
kidneys. Reopolyglukin is used for the prevention and treatment of shock; thrombosis, 
thrombophlebitis, endarteritis, for addition to perfusion fluid in cardiopulmonary 
bypass in cardiac surgery; to improve microcirculation and reduce the tendency to 
thrombosis in the transplant in vascular and plastic surgery. It may cause allergic 
reactions, anaphylaxis and is contraindicated in hyperhydration, disseminated vascular 
coagulation, thrombocytopenia, anuris, and heart failure. 
 
Detoxification drugs increase tWhe transport of toxic substances from tissues 
into blood and their excretion, improve microcirculation. They are used to treat 
sepsis, severe burns, endotoxic reactions, and acute poisonings. 

Chapter 29.  ANTISEPTICS AND DISINFECTANTS 
427
 
Neohemodez has the effect due to abilityz of low molecular weight polyvi-
nylpyrrolidone to bind toxins circulating in the blood and quickly remove them from 
the body. The drug contributes to the elimination of stasis of erythrocytes in capil-
laries, improves microcirculation, increases renal blood flow, glomerular filtration and 
diuresis. It is not metabolized in the body and quickly excreted by the kidneys. 
Indications are: shock, toxic diseases of the digestive tract (dysentery, dyspepsia, 
salmonellosis); burns, radiation and hemolytic disease, peritonitis, intestinal obstruc-
tion, thyrotoxicosis, liver diseases, sepsis, pneumonia; acute phase of myocardial 
infarction, toxemia of newborns, and gestosis. Side effects include lowering of BP, 
tachycardia, difficulty breathing, allergic reactions of varying severity. 
 
Drugs for IV nutrition contain amino acids, essential fatty acids and are used 
for parenteral nutrition in patients after surgeries, unconsciousness patients, etc. 
Aminosteril and lipofundin are preparations of this group. 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. The following statements concerning Lidasum are correct, except: 
 
It is hyaluronidase 
 
It is used to promote drug absorption 
 
It is used for replacement therapy 
 
It is used for the treatment of joint contractures 
 
It is used for scar softening. 
 
№2. The salt drug for the treatment of purulent wounds is: 
 
0,9% solution of sodium chloride 
 
5% solution of glucose 
 
25% solution of magnesium sulfate 
 
10% solution of calcium chloride 
 
10% solution of sodium chloride. 
 
№3. The main indications for the calcium chloride use are: 
 
Allergic reactions 
 
Vasculitis 
 
Thrombosis 
 
Bleeding 
 
Overdose of vitamin D. 
 
№4. Aminocaproic acid 
 
Is proteolytic enzyme 
 
Is the inhibitor of proteolysis 
 
Is the inhibitor of fibrinolysis 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Has anti-allergic and antitoxic properties 
 
Is used to treat purulent diseases. 
 
 
№5. A patient has bronchoectasia with purulent dense exudation. The 
physician prescribes him inhalations of an enzyme preparation. The drug 
suitable in this case is 
 
Lydasum 
 
Aprotinin 
 
Trypsin 
 
Parathyroidin 
 
Pancreatinum. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – C; № 2 – E; № 3 – A, B, D; № 4 – B, C, D; № 5 – C. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
29 ANTISEPTICS 
AND DISINFECTANTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS 
 
Antimicrobial agents are drugs for the treatment and prevention of infection 
diseases. They are divided into disinfectants, antiseptics, and chemotherapeutics 
(fig. 29.1). Disinfectants realize their antimicrobial properties in the environment 
outside the body. Antiseptics act on the surface of the body. Chemotherapeutics 
produce an antimicrobial effect inside the body. 
 
 
ANTIMICROBIAL 
 
AGENTS 
 
 
 
Disinfectants 
Antiseptics 
Chemo- 
(on the surface 
therapeutics 
(outside the body) 
of the body) 
(inside the body) 
 
Fig. 29.1. Main classes of antimicrobial agents. 
 
Antimicrobial drugs may have a bactericidal or bacteriostatic type of action (fig. 
29.2). Antimicrobial drugs of a bactericidal action produce death of microbes. 

 
Bacteriostatic drugs stop the growth and replication of bacteria and then the 
immune system destroys such microbes. 
 
 
ANTIMICROBIAL 
 
ACTION 
 
 
 
Bactericidal 
Bacteriostatiс 
(arrest the growth and 
(kill bacteria) 
replication of bacteria) 
 
Fig. 29.2. Types of antimicrobial action. 
 
ANTISEPTICS AND DISINFECTANTS 
 
Good antiseptic and disinfectant should meet such demands as: 
 
 
Bactericidal action 
 
 
Chemical stability 
 
 
A rapid action 
 
 
Lack of absorption 
 
 
Low toxicity 
 
 
Efficacy in the presence of different organic substrates, such as pus, 
blood, sputum 
 
The absence of allergic properties 
 
 
The absence of irritability. 
There are 3 main mechanisms of an antimicrobial action of antiseptics and 
disinfectants: 
 
 
The denaturation of bacterial proteins, including enzymes 
 
 
The oxidation of bacterial protoplasma (cytoplasma) 
 
 
Changing of bacterial membrane properties and an increase in its perme-
ability 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Inorganic substances 
 
B. Organic substances 
 
1. Halogens 
 
1. Aldehydes 

Chapter 29. 
ANTISEPTICS AND DISINFECTANTS 
431
– 
Iodine (5% alcohol 
– 
Formaldehyde (Formalinum) 
solution) 
– 
Hexamethylentetraminum 
– 
Povidone- iodine 
(Methenamine) 
– 
Ioddicerin 
2. Alcohols 
– 
Chloramine В 
–  Ethyl alcohol (Spiritus aethylicus) 
–  Chlorhexidine (Hibitane) 3. Phenol derivatives 
 
2. Oxidizing agents 
– 
Phenol (Phenolum purum, Carbolic acid) 
 
– Hydrogen peroxide 
– 
Resorcinol 
 
–  Potassium permanganate  4. Dyes 
 
3. Metallic salts 
– 
Methylene blue (Methylenum 
– 
Mercury dichloridum 
coeruleum) 
– 
Yellow mercury oxide 
–  Brilliant green (Viride nitens) 
– 
Silver nitrate 
– 
Etacridine lactate 
– 
Copper sulfate 
5. Detergents 
– 
Zinc sulfate 
– Etonium 
– 
Zinc oxide 
– Decamethoxine 
4. Acids and alkalis 
– Miramistin 
– 
Boric acid 
6. Tar, resins, products of petroleum 
– 
Salicylic acid 
–  Birch tar (Pix liquida Betulae) 
– 
Solution of ammonia 
– 
Ichthyol 
– 
Liniment by Vishnevsky 
 Nitrofuran derivatives 
 
–  Nitrofurasone (Furacilinum) 
 
 Antiseptics from medicinal plants 
 
– Chlorophylipt 
 
– Novoimanin 
 
 Combined preparations 
 
– Sterillium 
 
– Cutasept 
 
 
OXIDIZING AGENTS 
 
HYDROGEN PEROXIDE 
 
Mechanism of action and effects: 
 
The drug’s effects are based on the destruction of hydrogen peroxide with the 
release of oxygen atoms. They produce the oxidation and denaturation of proteins. 

432 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
The formation of molecules of O2 results in the foam formation and mechanical 
cleaning of the wound (fig. 29.3). 
 
 
Oxidazing of 
proteins in microbes 
H2O2 
H2O + ½ O2 
Clean of the wound 
Deodorizing action 
Termination of 
capillary bleeding 
Whitening action 
 
 
Fig. 29.3. Pharmacological effects of hydrogen peroxide. 
 
Indications: 
 
 
processing of wounds (3% solution) 
 
processing of impaired skin 
 
gargling and mouthwash in diseases of the throat and oral cavity 
 
capillary bleeding 
 
whitening of teeth, the depigmentation of skin. 
 
The drug should not be used in deep wounds and injures of bigger vessels. 
 
POTASSIUM PERMANGANATE 
 
Mechanism of action and effects: 
 
The drug’s effects are grounded on the degradation of the molecule of 
potassium permanganate with the releasing of oxygen atoms and manganum oxide 
(fig. 29.4). Oxygen produces the oxidation and denaturation of proteins resulting 
in a bactericidal action. It also oxidizes some poisons. Manganum oxide causes an 
astringent action on the macroorganism. 
 
Indications: 
 
 
the irrigation of purulent wounds (0,1-0,5% solution) 

Chapter 29.  ANTISEPTICS AND DISINFECTANTS 
433
 
 
gargling and mouthwash in diseases of the throat and oral cavity (0,01-
0,1% solution) 
 
syringing in gynecology and urology (0,01-0,1% solution) 
 
 
processing of burns (2-5% solution) 
 
 
the lavage of the stomach in acute poisoning with morphine, alcohol, 
alka-loids (0,1% solutions). 
 
 
Astringent action 
 
Oxidazing of 
 
proteins in microbes 
  
KMnO4  
 MnO + O 
 
Deodorizing action 
 
 
Antidote action 
 
Fig. 29.4. Pharmacological effects of potassium permanganate. 
 
HALOGENS 
 
IODINE ALCOHOL SOLUTION 
 
Mechanism of action and effects: 
 
Effects of iodine are based on the interaction between atoms of halogen and 
proteins resulting in halogenization and oxidation of proteins (fig. 29.5). It has 
bac-tericidal, fungicidal and irritative actions. 
 
 
Oxidazing of proteins 
Bactericidal 
Iodine (I2) 
Halogenizing of proteins 
action 
Irritation of skin 
and mucous membranes 
 
Fig. 29.5. Pharmacological effects of iodine. 

434 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Indications: 
 
 
processing of small cuts of the skin 
 
 
processing of the surgery skin area and surgeon’s hands 
 
 
dermatomycoses 
 
diseases of muscles and joints (the “iodine network” on the skin). 
 
Toxity: 
 
Iodine may cause the irritation of the skin, allergy, idiosyncrasy. On the surface 
of the skin or mucuos membrane it should be neutralized by sodium thiosulphate. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER HALOGENS 
 
Povidone-iodne is a chemical complex of povidone, hydrogen iodide, and 
elemental iodine. It works by iodine releasing with following bactericidal effect, 
exhibits longer lasting antiseptic effects than tincture of iodine; has found broad 
application in medicine for pre- and post-operative skin cleansing; for the treatment 
and prevention of infections in wounds, ulcers, cuts and burns; in gynecology for 
vaginitis associated with candidal, trichomonal or mixed infections; is contraindicated 
in patients with diseases of the thyroid gland and after the treatment with radioiodine. 
 
Ioddicerin is a combined preparation; contains iodine, Dimexidum, and glyc-
erin; due to Dimexidum, has an increased antiseptic activity and penetration 
through the skin; is used for the treatment of skin diseases, ulcers, wounds; may be 
used on the mucous membranes due to less irritation (in otitis, tonsillitis, chronic 
atrophic rhinitis, paradontosis, vaginitis). 
 
Chloramine B is an organic compound containing chlorine; transforms into the 
hypoclorite acid which decays into chlorine and oxygen: chlorine exerts irreversible oxi-
dation of SH-groups of proteins and forms toxic N-chlorocompounds, oxygen oxidizes 
proteins; has disinfection, antiseptic and deodorizing actions; is used for the disinfection of 
the environment, clothes, non-metallic instruments (1-5%); rarely for the treatment of 
purulent wounds (1-2% solution) and processing of the skin (0,25-0,5% solution). 
 
Chlorhexidine (Chlorhexidinum bigluconas) is an organic chlorine 
containing preparation with detergent properties; has an antimicrobial, antifungal 
activity, im-proves regeneration; is used for the treatment of wounds, for gargling, 
for individual prophylaxis of sexually transmitted infections, for the processing of 
the surgeon’s hands, the surgical skin area, for a quick sterilization of instruments. 
 
ACIDS AND ALKALIS 
 
Mechanism of action: 
 
Acids and alkalis produce changes in pH leading to the inactivation of 
enzymes and denaturation of microbial proteins. 

Chapter 29.  ANTISEPTICS AND DISINFECTANTS 
435
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Boric acid can be used for minor burns or cuts, acne treatment, prevention of 
athlete's foot; treatment of bacterial vaginitis and candidiasis due to non-albicans 
candida, in alcohol solution is used to treat external otitis; is applied in a very 
dilute aqueous solution as eye drops in bacterial conjunctivitis. 
 
Salicylic acid has an antimicrobial action, an anti-inflammatory effect, a 
kera-tolytic action in bigger doses (causes the reduction of the upper skin layer) 
and a keratoplastic action in lower doses (increases the development of the upper 
skin layer); is used in dermatology. 
 
Solution of ammonia (10%) has antimicrobial, weak detergent, irritative, and 
reflexive actions; is used for the processing of the surgeon’s hands, but the main 
indication is a reflexive stimulation of respiration in syncope. 
 
METALLIC SALTS 
 
Mechanism of action and effects: 
 
The action of metallic salts on microbial cell results from their interaction 
with SH-groups of proteins which leads to the inactivation of enzymes (fig. 29.6). 
 
The metallic salts action on human tissues may be with the prevalence of 
astrin-gent or caustic action. This phenomenon depends on chemical properties of 
metallic ions. On such activity, metals form Shmideberg’s line. In this line, 
mercury salts have a caustic action, silver salts – caustic and astringent properties, 
salts of copper, zinc – an astringent action only. 
 
 
Salts of 
 
heavy metals 
 
Binding to SH-groups 
 
 
Inactivation 
 
of enzymes 
 
and precipitation of 
 
proteins 
 
 
Astringent and 
Antimicrobial 
 
caustic action 
action 
 
Fig. 29.6. Pharmacological effects of heavy metal salts. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 

436 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Mercury dichloride has a bactericidal effect which is decreased at the presence of 
proteins; is very toxic; is used for the disinfection of clothes, non-metallic instruments. 
 
Yellow mercury oxide is not soluble, is used in the form of ointments for the 
treatment of pyoderma, blepharitis, seborrhea, pediculosis. 
 
Silver nitrate rapidly kills microbes, but the action persists for a long period 
because of a slow release of silver ions from silver proteinates formed by interac-
tion with tisue proteins; is used to cauterize erosions, ulcers, surplus granulations; 
in past, it was used for the prophylaxis of blenorrhea in newborns. Organic silver 
preparations (Protargol, Collargol) are indicated for the treatment of 
conjunctivitis, diseases of the throat, urological and gynecological diseases. 
 
Copper and zinc sulfates are used in the forms of solutions for external use, eye 
drops, ointments, pastes; are applied for the treatment of wounds, burns, diseases of 
the oral cavity, eye infections, for the washing of the urethra and urinary bladder. 
Copper sulfate is used in chemical burns caused by white phosphor. 
 
Zinc oxide is an insoluble substance; has antimicrobial, astringent, and ab-
sorbting properties; is used as an ingredient of aspersions, ointments, and pastes to 
treat wounds, burns, skin diseases. 
 
Toxicity: 
 
Metallic salts can cause acute and chronic poisoning. Such poisoning is mani-
fested by vomiting, abdominal pain, metallic aftertaste, renal failure, CNS 
problems, and hypochromic anemia. Dimercaprol (Unithiol) is an antidote in 
poisoning with salts of heavy metals. Solution of sodium chloride is used for the 
neutralizing of silver nitrate. 
 
ALIPHATIC AGENTS (ALCOHOLS AND ALDEHYDES) 
 
ALCOHOL (SPIRITUS AETHYLICUS) 
 
Mechanism of action and effects: 
 
The alcohol’s mechanism of action is connected with the inhibition of oxido-
reductases, dehydratation and precipitation of proteins. The result is a bactericidal 
action (an antiseptic effect and disinfection). It also has an irritating and tannic action. 
 
Indications: 
 
 
processing of the surgeon’s hands and surgical area (70%) 
 
 
processing of instruments (95%) 
 
 
compresses (40%). 

Chapter 29.  ANTISEPTICS AND DISINFECTANTS 
437
 
FORMALDEHYDE 
 
Mechanism of action and effects: 
 
It acts on spores of bacteria and fungi (bactericidal action), dehydrates 
proteins and tissues (mummifying action), has deodorizing properties (fig.29.7). 
Standard 40% solution of formaldehide is called Formalinum. 
  
Formaldehyde 
Deodorizing action 
Denaturation and 
dehydratation of proteins 
Antimicrobial 
Antiseptic 
Mummifying action 
action 
Disinfectant 
 
Fig. 29.7. Pharmacological effects of formaldehyde. 
 
Indications: 
 
 
freet sweating (0,5-1% solution) 
 
 
syringing in gynecology (in ratio 1:2000) 
 
 
disinfection (0,5% solution) 
 
 
the conservation of vaccines and serums 
 
 
the conservation of anatomic preparations. 
Toxity: 
 
Formaldehyde irritates the skin and mucous membranes of the upper respiratory 
 
pathways. It can cause acute poisoning. A weak solution of ammonia or ammonia 
chloride is an antidote in this case. 
 
HEXAMETHYLENTETRAMINE (UROTROPINUM) 
 
Hexamethylentetramine is a derivative of formaldehyde; is administered IV 
and orally; transforms into formaldehyde in the organism; is used for the treatment 
of infections of urinary pathways, cholecystitis, as well as for a decrease in 
intracranial pressure in meningitis or encephalitis. 
 
AROMATIC COMPOUNDS (PHENOLS, TARS, RESINS) 

438 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
PHENOL (CARBOLIC ACID) 
 
Mechanism of action and effects: 
 
It blocks dehydrogenases, denaturates proteins and damages the membranes 
 
of bacteria. Bonds between phenol and protein are not strong and one molecule of 
phenol can interact with few protein molecules by turn. Phenol has a bacteriostatic 
action in a low concentration and bactericidal action in a bigger concentration. The 
action of aqueous solutions of phenol is stronger than the effect of oil solutions. It 
is a reference preparation for the comparison with other antiseptics. 
 
Indications: 
 
 
disinfection (3-5% soluions) 
 
the conservation of serums and drugs 
 
external otitis (0,5-0,1% oil solutions) 
 
some forms of rhinitis (ozena) 
 
infections of the oral mucosa and throat (spray). 
Toxity: 
 
Phenol is very toxic. It can penetrate through the skin and mucous membranes 
 
and cause acute poisoning. A specific therapy is absent in this case. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER AROMATIC ANTISEPTICS 
 
Resorcinol is used for the treatment of skin diseases (eczema, seborrhea, itch, 
fungal diseases). 
Ichthyol is a dense liquid of dark color; belongs to the group of “tars and 
resins”; is a product of processing of some minerals; contains aromatic compounds 
and sulfur; has an antimicrobial action, decreases inflammation and pain, 
improves regeneration; is used in burns, erysipelas. 
Birch tar (Pix liquida Betulae) is a product of sublimation of birch bark; is a 
dense oil-like liquid of black color; contains aromatic compounds; has antiseptic 
properties, an insecticide action, an irritating and keratoplastic action; is used in skin 
 
diseases; is an ingredient of balsamic liniment by Vishnevsky. 
 
DYES 
 
Mechanism of action and effects: 
 
Dyes inhibit bacterial enzyme systems. Cations of dyes replace anions in 
natural compounds with the formation of insoluble complexes. By an 
antimicrobial action, dyes are less active than other antiseptics. The spectrum of 
action is not so wide as in other antiseptics: they act mainly on Gram (+) cocci. 

Chapter 29.  ANTISEPTICS AND DISINFECTANTS 
439
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Metylene blue is is used for the processing of burns, pyoderma, diseases of 
the mucous membrane of the oral cavity (1-2 % aqueous and alcohol solutions), 
for the washing of the urethra and urinary bladder (0,02% water solution), is an 
antidote in poisoning with cyanids, nitrites, and aniline derivatives (IV as the 
preparation Chromosmon) 
 
Brilliant green acts mainly on staphylococci; is used for pyoderma, skin 
pustules, small cuts, blepharitis (1-2% water and alcohol solutions). 
 
Etacridine lactate acts mainly on streptococci; is non-toxic, does not irritate 
tissues; is used for the processing and treatment of wounds (0,05-0,1%), the washing 
of cavities (0,05-0,1%), in conjunctivitis (0,1% eye drops) and for gargling (0,1-1%). 
 
DETERGENTS 
 
Mechanism of action and effects: 
 
These agents have a bactericidal action due to a decrease of the surface tension of 
substances and to an increase of the permeability of cell membranes (fig. 29.8). 
 
 
Detergents 
Changes in surface tension 
Washing action 
An increase in 
membrane permeability 
Leakage of 
cellular contents 
Bactericidal and 
fungicidal action 
 
Fig. 29.8. Pharmacological effects of detergents. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Etonium is a quaternary ammonium compound, cationic detergent; has an anti-
septic action, stimulates regeneration, causes local anesthesia and decreases intoxica- 

440 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
tion; is used for the treatment of wounds, trophic ulcers, radiation injures (0,02-1% 
 
solution), eye diseases (0,1% eye drops), otitis, tonsillitis, burns, dermatitis (ointment). 
Decamethoxine is a quaternary ammonium compound, cationic detergent; by its 
pharmacological activity is similar to Aethonium; may be also used for the process-ing 
of the surgeon’s hands, surgical area, disinfection of surgical instruments and 
 
nursing items, for the irrigations of bronchi, and washing of cavities. Miramistin’s 
action is based on the direct hydrophobic interaction with lipids 
 
of microorganism membranes, leading to their fragmentation, increased 
permeability and cytolysis. It acts on bacteria, viruses and fungi. Indications to use 
include treat-ment of infected wounds and burns, prevention and treatment of 
postpartum infec-tions; inflammatory diseases of the genital organs, treatment of 
skin and mucosal candidiasis, foot mycoses, individual prevention of sexually 
transmitted diseases, combined therapy of acute and chronic otitis media, sinusitis, 
tonsillitis, periodontitis, and stomatitis. In some cases, a brief burning sensation, 
itching, hyperemia, and dry skin are possible. 
 
NITROFURAN DERIVATIVES 
 
NITROFURASONE (FURACILINUM) 
 
Mechanism of action and effects: 
 
It inhibits carbohydrates metabolism and tissue respiration in bacteria; has a 
bactericidal and bacteriostatic action. 
 
Indications: 
 
 
the washing and the treatment of purulent wounds, ulcers, burns (0,02% 
water solution) 
 
the irrigation of cavities (0,02% water solution) 
 
 
gargling (0,02% water solution) 
 
 
otitis (alcohol solution 1: 1500) 
 
 
skin pustules (alcohol solution 1:1500) 
 
 
conjunctivitis (0,02% eye drops). 
 
ANTISEPTICS FROM MEDICINAL PLANTS 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Chlorophyllipt is a mixture of chlorophylls from eucalypt (fig. 29.9) used in the 
form of alcohol or oil solution; acts mainly on cocci, especially on staphylococci; is 

Chapter 29.  ANTISEPTICS AND DISINFECTANTS 
441
 
applied for the treatment of wounds, burns, trophic ulcers, erosions of the uterus cervix, 
irrigations of the cavities (alcohol solution should be dissolved before application); may be 
used IV in sepsis or pneumonia caused by staphylococcus; causes allergy. 
 
Novoimanin is an antiseptic from the herb of Hypericum (st. John’s wort), acts on 
Gram (+) cocci, is used topically for treatment of wounds, burns, abscesses, etc. 
 
COMBINED ANTISEPTICS 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Sterillium contains ethanol (81-89%), moisturizing, softening and protective 
components for the skin, thickener, flavor and water. It has a bactericidal, 
fungicidal and virulocidal action, reduces transient and resident skin microflora; 
keeps the ac-tion for 1 hr on the skin, 3 hr – in gloves; provides antiperspirant 
action (reduces the amount of moisture under gloves), does not irritate the skin. 
Sterilium gel is designed for the treatment of the hands of medical personnel, 
workers of pharma-cies, children's institutions, food industry enterprises, etc.; can 
be used in caring for newborns, old people, patients, on travel, or for rapid 
disinfection of tools and gloves in the urgent situations. 
 
Cutasept contains 2-propanol, benzalkonium chloride and water. It has 
bactericidal, fungicidal and virulocidal action. The area of application is pre and 
postoperative treatment of skin and wounds, treatment of the skin before 
injections, with the removal of seams, the replacement of bandages, with minor 
injuries and eczematous lesions. 
 
APPLICATION OF ANTISEPTICS 
 
AND DISINFECTANTS 
 
There are many potent antiseptics and disinfectants, but some preparations or 
group of preparations are most suitable in the cases pointed at fig. 29.10. 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
 
1. The antiseptic from the oxidizers group is only: 
A. Silver nitrate 
B. Hydrogen peroxide 
C. Aethonium 
D. Phenol 
 
E.  Iodine solution. 
 
 
2. For the processing of the surgeon’s hands all the drugs are used, except: 

442 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 29.9. Eucalypt as a source of antiseptics. 
 
 
Alcohol 
 
 
Mercury dichloride 
 
 
Chlorhexidine bigluconate 
 
 
Solution of ammonia 
 
 
Solution of iodine. 
 
 
3. Nitrofurasone is: 
 
A. Disinfectant 
B. Antiseptic 
C.  Bactericidal to gram positive and gram negative pathogens 
 
D. Inhibiting enzymes participating in carbohydrate metabolism of bacteria 
E. Used for wound irrigation. 
 
 
4. Phenol is: 
 
 
An organic antiseptic 
 
 
Used for the irrigation of wounds 
 
 
Protoplasmic poison 
 
 
A chemotherapeutic agent 
 
 
A standard for comparing of other germicides. 

Chapter 29.  ANTISEPTICS AND DISINFECTANTS 
443
 
 
5. A patient is admited to the clinic with severe abdominal pain and 
vomiting. The copper-colored shade of the mucosa in the oral cavity 
and metallic aftertaste are observed. Three days after that, the symptoms 
of acute re-nal failure and the defeat of CNS are appeared. What is the 
cause of the poisoning? What must antidote therapy include? 
 
 
Iodine and solution of sodium thiosulfate 
 
 
Formaldehyde and solution of ammonia chloride 
 
 
Mercury dichloride and Unithiolum 
 
 
Strong acid and sodium bicarbonate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 29.10. Summary of application of antiseptics and disinfectants (by. H.Lüllmann, 2000). 

444 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
E.  Alcohol and sodium permanganate. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – B; № 2 – B; №3 – B, C, D, E; № 4 – A, C, E; № 5 – C. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMON PRINCIPLES 
 
OF CHEMOTHERAPY. 
SULFONAMIDES. 
30 CHEMOTHERAPEUTICS 
OF DIFFERENT 
CHEMICAL STRUCTURE. 
ANTIFUNGAL DRUGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAIN CONCEPTS OF CHEMOTHERAPY 
 
Chemotherapeutic drugs are anti-infective drugs realizing their action inside the 
body. They are divided into antibiotics, sulfonamides, fluorquinolones and anti-
microbial drugs of different chemical structure, antifungal drugs, antimycobacterial 
drugs, antiviral drugs, antiprotozoal drugs, antihelminthics (fig. 30.1). 
 
TYPES OF ANTIMICROBIAL ACTION 
 
There are two types of antimicrobial action: bactericidal and bacteriostatic 
(fig. 30.2). The drug with bactericidal action produces the death of microbes. The 
drug of bacteriostatic action inhibits the growth and reduplication of microbial 
cells and after that the immune system destroys such organisms. 

446 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
CHEMOTHERAPEUTICS 
 
Antibiotics 
 
Sulfonamides 
 
Fluorquinolones 
 
Antifungal drugs 
 
Antimycobacterial drugs 
 
Antiviral drugs 
 
Antiprotozoal drugs 
 
Antihelminthics 
 
Fig. 30.1. Main classes of chemotherapeutics. 
 
 
 
 
Bactericidal 
action 
DRUG 
Bacteria 
killing 
Bacteriostatic 
action 
  
DRUG 
     Bacteria 
 
 
 
stopping of reproduction 
 
and growth 
 
 
Fig. 30.2. Types of antimicrobial action. 

Chapter 30.  COMMON PRINCIPLES OF CHEMOTHERAPY 
447
 
SPECTRUM OF ACTION 
 
The spectrum of action is the list of species of microbes affected by this 
chemo-therapeutic (fig. 30.3). 
 
 
 
Spectrum of action 
Narrow 
Broad 
(wide) 
 
 
 
 
 
A single species or 
 
limited amount of 
 
microbes' species 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Many species of microbes 
 
including both cocci and 
 
bacilli 
 
 
Fig. 30.3. Spectrum of antimicrobial action. 
 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF ANTI-INFECTIVE THERAPY 
 
 
The selection of an appropriate chemotherapeutic agent: 1) should be 
grounded on the spectrum of action; 2) should be based on the laboratory 
identification of the infecting microorganism; 3) if the infecting organism is 
unknown, a wide spectrum drugs (or drugs combination) should be used. 
 
 
The selection of the optimal route of administration and dose 
 
 
The maintenance of a constant chemotherapeutic concentration 
 
 
The discontinuation of chemotherapy during 2-3 days after the 
normaliza-tion of body temperature 
 
A rational combination of drugs 
 
 
Taking into account the patient’s sensitivity to the drug (an allergic test 
before the start of treatment) 
 
Taking into account the site of infection, the immune competence, the 
age, and physiological status 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
The clinical and laboratory monitoring of a therapeutic response to drug 
therapy 
  
SULFONAMIDES (SULFA DRUGS) 
 
Sulfonamides and trimethoprim belong to folate antagonists. They are 
synthetic antimicrobial drugs inhibiting folate synthesis. Sulfonamides are 
sructural analogs of para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) (fig. 30.4). All sulfas have 
common pharmaco-logical properties. 
 
 
A 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 30.4. Chemical structure of PABA (A) and sulfonamides (B). 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Highly absorbed sulfonamides 
 
 
Short-acting 
 
–  Sulfamethazine (Sulfadimezin) 
 
–  Aethazolum 
 
 
Intermediate-acting 
 
–  Sulfamethoxazole 
 
–  Sulfaphenoxazole 
 
 
Long-acting 
 
–  Sulfamethoxypyridazine (Sulfapyridazinum) 
 
–  Sulfadimethoxine 
 
 
Ultralong-acting 
 
– Sulfamethoxypyrazine (Sulfalenum) 
B. Poorly absorbed sulfonamides 
 
–  Phthalylsulfathiazole (Phthalazolum) 
 
C. Sulfonamides for a local use 
 
–  Sulfacetamide sodium (Sulfacylum natrium, Albucid) 
 
–  Sulfonamide (Streptocidum) 

Chapter 30.  COMMON PRINCIPLES OF CHEMOTHERAPY 
449
 
D. Derivatives of sulfonamide and the salicylic acid or silver 
 
–  Sulfasalazine (salazosulfa) 
 
–  Salazopiridazine 
 
–  Silver sulfadiazine 
 
E. Combinations of sulfonamides and trimethoprim 
 
–  Co-trimoxazole (Bactrim). 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
are taken orally, sometimes are administered IV or applied topically 
 
 
are absorbed in the small intestine 
 
 
bind to serum albumen 
 
 
penetrate CNS and placenta 
 
 
are metabolized in the liver: most sulfas undergo acetylation 
accompanied by a decrease of their solubility that results in the crystals 
formation in renal tubuli 
 
 
are excreted the with urine. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Structural similarity to PABA provides competitive antagonism of sulfona-
mides to PABA and the blockade of dehydropteroid synthase (fig. 30.5). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 30.5. The role of PABA in folate synthesis (at left) 
 
and its blockade by sulfonamides (at right) (http://www.picsearch.com). 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
This leads to the inhibition of stage I of the synthesis of the folic acid 
active form in a microbial cell. 
 
The absence of tetrahydrofolate results in disturbances in the synthesis of 
nucleic basis and then in the synthesis of nucleic acids. 
 
The reduplication and growth of microbes are inhibited (bacteriostatic 
action). 
 
Sulfonamides act only on the organisms using PABA in their life cycle. 
 
 
Sulfas are inactive in the purulent environment rich in PABA. 
 
 
They leak antimicrobial activity in the presence of ester local anesthetics 
which are hydrolyzed to PABA. 
 
The affinity of enzymes to sulfonamides is less than to a natural substance, 
that’s why a strike dose of the drug is necessary at the start of treatment. 
 
Drugs, inhibiting the second stage of folate synthesis (e.g. trimethoprim), 
are synergic to sulfas. 
  
Spectrum of action 
 
Sulfonamides have a broad spectrum of action. They are effective against Gram 
 
 
cocci (Streptococci, Staphylococci), Gram (–) cocci (Neisseria gonorrhoeae), Gram (-) 
bacilli (Haemophilus influenzae, E.coli, Shigella, Yersenia enterocolitica, Proteus 
mirabilis), Nocardia, Actinomycetes, Chlamidia, Toxoplasma, Plasmodium malariae. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Respiratory infections 
 
 
Gastrointestinal infections 
 
 
Urinary tract infections 
 
 
Genital infections (gonorrhea) 
 
 
Trachoma 
 
 
Nocardiasis 
 
 
Toxoplasmosis 
 
 
Infections of the skin and mucous membranes 
 
 
Infections of the eyes 
 
Schemes of treatment 
 
For short-acting drugs: 4 tablets (2,0) for the 1st administration, then 2 tablets 
 
(1,0) 4 times a day, after the normalization of body temperature 1 tablet (0,5) 4 
times a day during 3 days. (Total dose is 20-30 g). 
 
For long-acting drugs: 4 tablets (2,0) for the 1st administration, then 2 tablets 
 
(1,0) once a day, after the normalization of body temperature 1 tablet (0,5) once a 
day during 3 days. (Total dose is 8-10 g). 

Chapter 30.  COMMON PRINCIPLES OF CHEMOTHERAPY 
451
 
For ultra-long-acting drugs: 5 tablets (1,0) for the 1st administration, then 1 
tablet (0,2) once a day (Total dose is 2 g). The total dose may be taken once a week. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Crystalluria 
 
 
Allergy 
 
 
Hemopoietic disturbances 
 
 
Dermatitis and phototoxicity 
 
 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome 
 
 
Hepatitis 
 
 
Kernicterus (in newborns) 
 
 
Idiosyncrasy (hemolytic anemia in patients with the deficiency of 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase). 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Sulfacetamide sodium is a well-soluble substance, is used as eye-drops in 
con-junctivitis, trauma of the eyes, the prophylaxis of eyes gonorrhea in newborns. 
 
Phtalylsulfathiazole is inactive in vitro, but active in the intestine because of 
norsulfazole’s liberation; is used for gastrointestinal infections. 
 
Aethazolum is rapidly absorbed in the gut and rapidly excreted; is used in 
urinary tract infections and nocardiasis. 
 
Sulfadimethoxine is a long-acting sulfonamide, is rapidly absorbed , but 
slowly excreted, has a half-life of 24-48 hrs, is concentrated in bile, thus is suitable 
to treat cholecystitis. 
 
Sulfalene is an ultralong-acting sulfonamide, has a half-life of more than 48hrs 
due to strong bonds with serum albumins and reabsorption in the kidney; is used orally 
for all infections sensitive to sulfa drugs; is suitable to treat long-durative infections. 
 
Co- Trimoxazalole is a combined preparation containing sulfamethoxazole 
together with trimethoprim. Sulfamethoxazole inhibits dehydropteroide synthase (stage 
I of the synthesis of the active form of the folic acid). Trimetoprim inhibits 
dehydrofolate reductase (stage II of the synthesis of an active form of the folic acid). A 
result is a bactericidal action. The antimicrobial spectrum of trimethoprim is similar to 
that of sulfonamide, however the combination is in 20-50 times more potent than 
sulfonamide. Pharmacokinetics of trimethoprim is similar to that of sulfamethoxazole. 
Co-trimoxazole is used to treat Pneumocystis Carrini pneumonia, respiratory infec-
tions, gastrointestinal infections (shigellosis, non-typhoid salmonella infections, the 
carrierity of Salmonella typhi), genital infections (gonorrhea), prostate and urinary 
tract infections. It may cause side-effects, such as skin lesions, nausea, vomiting, sto-
matitis, anemia, folate deficiency, special adverse reactions in HIV infected persons. 

452 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Salazopyridazine and sulfasalazine are the combinations of sulfonamides 
with the acetylsalicylic acid; have antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory effects; are 
used for ulcerative colitis. 
 
SYNTHETIC ANTIMICROBIAL 
 
DRUGS WITH DIFFERENT CHEMICAL STRUCTURE 
 
This group of preparations is represented by nitrofuran derivatives and 
quinolone derivatives. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Nitrofuran derivatives 
 
–  Furozolidone 
 
–  Nitrofurantoin (Furadoninum) 
 
 
Quinolones and fluorquinolones 
 
 
Quinolones 
 
–  Nitroxoline (5-NOK) 
 
–  Nalidixic acid 
 
 
Fluorquinolones 
 
 
the 1st generation 
 
–  Ciprofloxacin 
 
–  Ofloxacin 
 
 
the 2nd generation 
 
–  Lomefloxacin 
 
 
the 3rd generation 
 
–  Levofloxacin 
 
 
the 4th generation 
 
–  Gatifloxacin. 
 
FUROZOLIDONE 
 
 
is taken orally 3-4 times a day, is metabolized in the liver and inhibits 
liver enzymes, is excreted with urine 
 
disturbs proton transport during cell respiration 
 
 
has a wide spectrum of action: Gram (-) bacilli, Gram (+) bacteria (against 
which the drug is less effective), Trichomonas, Lamblia giardiasis 
 
 
is used in urinary tract infections, intestinal infections, bacillary dysentery, 
giardiasis, trichomoniasis, infected wounds and burns (topically) 

Chapter 30.  COMMON PRINCIPLES OF CHEMOTHERAPY 
453
 
 
may cause allergy, dyspepsia, a disulfiram-like reaction, an increase in 
BP if the diet is reach in tyramine. 
 
NIFUROXAZIDE 
 
 
is nitrofuran derivative 
 
 
is taken orally every 6 hr, acts in the lumen of the intestine, because it is 
practically not absorbed from the digestive tract, is excreted with feces 
 
is effective against staphylococcus, streptococcus, Salmonella, Shigella, 
Klebsiella, Escherichia coli, does not affect the composition of normal 
microflora of the large intestine, does not cause the emergence of drug-
resistant strains 
 
 
is used in diarrhea caused by gram-positive and some gram-negative 
bacte-ria, diarrhea caused by food intoxication, appendicitis, chronic 
autoimmune gastritis; diarrhea caused by antibiotic therapy or changes in 
the natural bacterial flora of the large intestine. 
 
NITROXOLINE 
 
 
is an oxiquinoline 
 
 
is taken orally, is excreted with urine and produces high concentration in 
urine 
 
disturbs reduplication of nucleic acids, forms complexes with metals ions 
and inhibits oxidative-reductive processes 
 
has a broad spectrum of action: Gram (-) cocci and bacilli, Gram (+) 
cocci, Candida albicans, Trichomonas vaginale 
 
has a bacteriostatic type of action 
 
 
is used in urological infections (so-called uroseptic) and for the 
prevention of infection before urological surgeries 
 
may cause allergy, dyspepsia, neurological problems (ataxia, paresthesia, 
neuropathy), an orange discoloration of urine. 
 
NALIDIXIC ACID 
 
 
is a quinolone 
 
 
is taken orally, partly is metabolized in the liver and excreted with urine 
 
 
inhibits topoisomerase II (DNA gyrase), in such a way disturbs DNA 
reduplication 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
the antimicrobial spectrum is narrow (only Gram (-) bacilli) and 
resistance emerges rapidly 
 
is used in urinary tract infections, cholecystitis, otitis media 
 
 
may cause side-effects, such as gastrointestinal irritation, glucosuria, skin 
rash, phototoxicity, CNS and visual disturbances. 
  
FLUORQUINOLONES 
 
 
are fluor-containing quinolones divided into 4 generations 
 
 
are administered orally or IV, are widely distributed in the body, produce 
high concentrations in the bones, urine, prostate, kidney, are concentrated 
in phagocytes and act on intracellular microbes, are excreted with urine 
or bile, have a half-life of from 3–8 hrs to 10–20 hrs 
 
 
inhibit the bacterial DNA gyrase (topoisomerase II) or the topoisomerase 
IV enzyme, thereby inhibiting DNA replication and transcription (fig. 
30.6). First and second generation fluoroquinolones selectively inhibit the 
topoi-somerase II ligase domain, leaving the two nuclease domains intact. 
This modification, coupled with the constant action of the topoisomerase 
II in the bacterial cell, leads to DNA fragmentation via the nucleasic 
activity of the intact enzyme domains. Third and fourth generation 
fluoroquinolones are more selective for the topoisomerase IV ligase 
domain, and thus have enhanced gram-positive coverage. 
 
 
the spectrum of action is wide: Gram (-) bacilli (Enterobacter, 
Pseudomonas, 
Haemophilus 
influenzae, 
Moxzarella, 
Legionella), 
Chlamidia, Mycobacteria, some Gram (+) cocci. Unlike the first and 
second generations, the third gen-eration is active against streptococci. 
Fourth-generation fluoroquinolones’ dual action on DNA gyrase and 
topoisomerase IV development of resist-ance. Fluoroquinolones can enter 
cells easily via porins and, therefore, are often used to treat intracellular 
pathogens (Lgionella pneumophila and Mycoplasma pneumoniae) 
 
 
are indicated in urinary tract infections, perioperative antibiotic 
prophylaxis for transurethral surgery, gonorrhea, gastrointestinal 
infections, infections of the bones, joints, skin, and soft tissues, resistant 
respiratory infections, tuberculosis (ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin) 
 
may cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, pseudomembranous colitis, 
headache, dizziness, psychosis, seizures, crystaluria, phototoxicity, 
cartilage lesions, tendon damage with spontaneous tendon rupture 

Chapter 30.  COMMON PRINCIPLES OF CHEMOTHERAPY 
455
 
 
are contraindicated to pregnant women, nursing mothers, children 
younger than 18 years old as well as to patients with epilepsy, stroke, 
severe renal insufficiency, QT-prolongation in the ECG. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 30.6. Mechanism of action of fluorquinolones (http://www.picsearch.com) 
 
ANTIFUNGAL DRUGS 
 
Antifungals are the preparations for the treatment of infections caused by 
pathogenous fungi (mycoses). 
 
Like mammalian cells, fungi are eukaryotes with DNA organized into chromo-
somes. This homology to mammalian cells also extends to biosynthetic pathways. The 
similarity of fungal and mammalian cells creates a number of problems for designing 
drugs that are selectively toxic to fungal cells, but not the human host. 
 
Both fungi and mammalian cells contain a cell membrane. The sterol contents 
between mammalian cells and fungal cells is different. Ergosterol is the predominant 
sterol in many pathogenic fungi. This difference in sterol content has been exploited 
 
as the target of an antifungal drug action by several classes of antifungal agents 
 
CLASSIFICATION 

456 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
Antibiotics 
 
 
Polyenes 
 
–  Nystatin 
 
–  Amphotericin B 
 
 
Heterocyclic benzofurane 
 
–  Griseofulvin 
 
 
Azoles 
 
 
Imidazoles 
 
–  Clotrimazole 
 
–  Miconazole 
 
–  Ketokonazole 
 
 
Triazoles 
 
–  Fluconazole 
 
–  Itraconazole 
 
 
Antimetabolites 
 
–  Flucirosine 
 
 
Allylamines 
 
–  Terbinafine. 
 
POLYENES 
 
Polyene antifungals, such as amphotericin B and nystatin, act by binding to 
ergosterol in the fungal cell membrane (fig. 30.7). This results in the 
depolarization of the membrane and formation of pores that increase permeability 
to proteins and monovalent and divalent cations, eventually leading to cell death. 
Amphotericin B may also induce oxidative damage in fungal cells and has been 
reported to stimulate of host immune cells. 
 
Amphoterricin B has a wide antifungal spectrum of action including 
Histoplasma capsulata, Cryptococcus neoforenans, Coccidioides immitis, 
Blastomyces dermati-tidis, Candida albicans, Aspergilus, Sporotrichum. It is used 
in systemic mycoses. Toxicities of polyene antifungals are an extension of their 
mechanism of action. The stimulation of the host immune cells by amphotericin B 
causes the release of inflammatory cytokines by circulating monocytes resulting in 
fever, chills, rigor, nausea, vomiting, myalgias, arthralgias, and headache during 
IV infusions. In higher concentrations, amphotericin B binds to cholesterol in 
mammalian cell membranes leading to various organ toxicities. 
 
Nystatin has a narrow antifungal spectrum. It is only effective against Candida 
fungi and is used for the treatment of Candida infections of the skin and mucous 

Chapter 30.  COMMON PRINCIPLES OF CHEMOTHERAPY 
457
 
membranes, as well as for the prevention of candidiasis under the therapy of wide-
spectrum antibiotics. 
Both polyenes are described in detail in Chapter 31. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 30.7. Mechanism of action of polyenes (http://www.picsearch.com). 
 
GRISEOFULVIN 
 
 
is an antibiotic, heterocyclic benzofurane 
 
 
is taken orally, is absorbed in the small intestine, concentrates in the infected 
newly synthesized keratin-containing tissue (skin, nails, hair), is metabo-lized 
in the liver, is the inducer of cytochrome P-450, is excreted with urine 
 
 
interferes with the microtubule function, disturbs the mitosis of fungal 
cells, inhibits the synthesis of nucleic acids, has a fungistatic action 
 
 
has the spectrum of action represented by dermatophytes (Microsporon, 
Epidermophyton, Trichophyton) 
 
is used for the treatment of dermatomycoses, mycoses of the scalp and nails 
 
 
may cause headache, CNS problems, hepatotoxicity, gastrointestinal 
distress, leukopenia, skin rash, phototoxicity. 
 
is contraindicated in pregnancy, malignant diseases; should not be used in 
patients whose job needs a quick motor reaction. 

458 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
AZOLES 
 
 
are imidazole or triazole derivatives (fig. 30.8) 
 
 
are taken orally and applied topically; are absorbed in the gut; absorption 
is impaired by food, cimetidine, rifampim; are widely distributed in body 
tissues; penetrates into CNS poorly; are metabolized in the liver and 
inhibit cytochrome P-450 
 
 
inhibit 
the 
fungal 
cytochrome 
P-450-dependent 
enzyme 
14-α-
demethylase (fig. 30.9), thereby interrupting the synthesis of ergosterol. 
Inhibition of this critical enzyme in the ergosterol synthesis pathway 
leads to the depletion of ergosterol in the cell membrane and the 
accumulation of toxic intermedi-ate sterols causing increased membrane 
permeability and the inhibition of fungal growth 
 
 
have a wide antifungal spectrum of action 
 
 
are indicated in mucocutaneous candidiasis, prophylaxis of candidiasis, 
dermatomycoses, cryptococcal infection, infections due to Blastomyces, 
Sporotrix, Coccidioides, Histoplasma 
 
 
may cause side-effects, such as nausea, vomiting, allergy, hepatotoxicity, 
blockade of the synthesis of testosterone and adrenal steroids, 
gynecomastia, changes in the pharmacokinetics of other drugs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
B 
 
 
Fig. 30.8. Chemical structure of ketokonazole (A) and fluconazole (B). 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Ketoconazole is used for systemic mycoses caused by Blastomyces, Coccidioides, 
Histoplasma, for dermatomycoses, and chronic candidiasis; has antihormonal activity, 
blocks cytochrome P-450-enzymes and changes the metabolism of co-administered 
drugs; may cause gynecomastia, impotence, menstrual irregularities; may accumulate 
in patients with hepatic dysfunction; antagonizes amphotericin B antifungal effect and 
should not be given together with amphotericin. 

Chapter 30.  COMMON PRINCIPLES OF CHEMOTHERAPY 
459
 
Clotrimazole (Canesten) is used to treat vaginal yeast infections, oral thrush, 
diaper rash, pityriasis versicolor, and types of ringworm including athlete's foot and 
jock itch; can be taken by mouth or applied to the skin or in the vagina; may be 
compounded with a glucocorticoid (betamethasone) in the topical cream. Common 
side effects when taken orally include nausea, itchiness, and abnormal liver function 
tests; when applied to the skin – redness and burning. With oral clotrimazole, there are 
multiple interactions as the drug is an inhibitor of microsomal oxidation. 
 
Fluconazole is administered orally and IV; does not bind to plasma proteins; 
penetrates into CNS; is eliminated by the kidney in an unchanged form; is used in 
oropharyngeal candidiasis, Coccidioides infection, vaginal candidiasis, for the pre-
vention and the treatment of cryptococcal infection; is less toxic than ketoconazole 
or amphotericin; has no endocrinal side-effects. 
 
Itraconazole is the drug of choice for the systemic mycoses caused by 
Blastomyces and Sporotrix; is an alternative drug in the treatment of aspergillosis, 
coccidiomycosis, cryptococcosis, and histoplasmosis; is used to treat dermatomy-
coses, to prevent superinfection during the therapy by wide-spectrum antibiotics. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 30.9. Mechanism of action of azoles (http://www.picsearch.com). 

460 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
ALLYLAMINES 
 
Allylamines (terbinafine) work in a conceptually similar fashion to azole anti-
fungals by inhibiting the synthesis of ergosterol. However, allylamines act at an earlier 
step in the ergosterol synthesis pathway by inhibiting the enzyme squalene epoxidase. 
 
ANTIMETABOLITES 
 
This class has only one example, flucytosine (5-fluorocytosine, 5-FC). 
Flucytosine was developed as a potential anti-cancer agent. Although ineffective 
against tumors, it was later found to have antifungal activity. This small molecule is 
transported into susceptible fungal cells by a specific enzyme cytosine permease and 
converted in the cytoplasm by cytosine deaminase to 5-fluorouracil, a pyrimidine anti-
metabolite. A result is the inhibition of nucleic acid synthesis in fungal cells. 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. The following is the bases for sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim com-
bination: 
 
 
The both drugs act at the same stage of folates metabolism 
 
 
The both drugs are bacteriostatic agents 
 
 
The combination of these drugs has less side-effects 
 
 
The combination has a long duration of action 
 
 
The both drugs have nearly similar plasma half-life. 
 
№2. The mechanism of a sulfonamides’ action is: 
 
 
Competitive antagonism with PABA 
 
 
The inhibition of the synthesis of microorganisms’ membrane 
 
 
An increase in permeability of microorganisms’ membranes 
 
 
The inhibition of the synthesis of microorganisms’ proteins 
 
 
The blockade of the sulfhydric groups of enzymes. 
 
№3. Drugs with antifungal activity belong to: 
 
 
Sulfonamides 
 
 
Polyenes 
 
 
Imidazoles 
 
 
Fluorquinolones 
 
 
Allylamines. 

№4. The correct statements concerning antifungals are: 
 
 
Nystatin has a narrow spectrum of action 
 
 
Amphotericin B is never used to treat systemic mycoses 
 
 
Griseofulvin concentrates in the skin, hair, and nails 
 
 
Itraconazole is antibiotic for the treatment of Candida infection only 
 
 
Ketoconazole has antihormonal activity. 
 
№5. A patient with acute cystitis was prescribed a highly active antimicrobial 
drug. It has a wide spectrum. The mechanism of its action is connected 
with the depression of DNA-gyrase. This drug influences negatively car-
tilaginous tissue. What drug was prescribed? 
 
 
Sulfalene 
 
 
Furozolidone 
 
 
Ciprofloxacine 
 
 
Nalidixic acid 
 
 
Nystatin. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – E; № 2 – A; № 3 – B,C,E; № 4 – A,C,E; № 5 – C. 

462 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 ANTIBIOTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANTIBIOTICS 
 
Antibiotics are substances produced by microbes for their antagonism with 
other microorganisms. Antagonism of microbes is named antibiosis. 
 
History of antibiotics. Antibiosis was studied by L. Paster and I. Mechnikov. 
The first antibiotic was penicillin. It was discovered by A. Fleming in 1928. The 
second antibiotic streptomycin was discovered by S. Waksman. He also proposed 
the name “antibiotics”. 
 
Antibiotics are divided: 
 
 According to the type of action 
 
–  bactericidal 
 
–  bacteriostatic. 
 
 According to the spectrum of action 
 
– antibiotics of a wide spectrum (with Gram (+) and Gram (-) coverage 
including Gram (-) bacilli) 
– antibiotics of a narrow spectrum of action (with a limited list of microbes, 
Gram (+) and Gram (-) coverage without Gram (-) bacilli, only Gram (+), 
or only Gram (-) coverage). 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
463
 
 According to the clinical use 
 
– basis antibiotics (antibiotics of choice) (the most effective antibiotics which 
are used at the start of treatment) 
– alternative antibiotics (preparations which are used for the replacement of 
basis antibiotics in the case of microbial resistance or patient’s 
hypersensitivity). 
 
MAIN PRINCIPLES OF THE THERAPY BY ANTIBIOTICS 
 
Therapy with antibiotics must be put into practice according to some common 
rules concerning both microorganism and macroorganism. These rules (principles) are: 
 
 
An early beginning of treatment 
 
 
The choice of an antibiotic according to its spectrum of action 
 
 
The choice of an antibiotic according to the sensitivity of microbes in a 
definite patient 
 
The use of a wide spectrum antibiotic if the cause of infection is unknown 
 
 
The duration of the treatment no less than 5-7 days 
 
 
The usage of big doses of antibiotics 
 
 
The supporting of the therapeutic concentration of the drug in the organism 
 
 
Combination of antibiotics with one another, as well as with drugs from 
other groups 
 
The discontinuation of the treatment after the normalization of a clinical 
status and body temperature 
 
Allergic test at the start of treatment 
 
 
Attention to the age, physiological status of the patient, concomitant 
diseases, the location and severity of infection. 
 
COMMON ANTIBIOTICS SIDE-EFFECTS 
 
 
Allergy, an anaphylactic shock. For prevention – an allergic test before 
the first administration of the drug 
 
A direct toxic influence 
 
 
Endotoxic reactions. They display as an increase in body temperature and 
intoxication resulting from the liberation of endotoxins from microbes 
destroyed by antibiotic 
 
 
Dysbacteriasis. It is the inhibition of normal microflora in the human 
body accompanied by activation of Candida fungi. For prevention – to 
take antifungal drugs (nystatin, itraconazole) together with a wide 
spectrum antibiotics. 

464 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Inhibitors of cell wall synthesis 
 
 
Penicillins 
 
 
Cephalosporins 
 
 
Carbapenems and monobactams 
 
 
Glycopeptides 
 
B. Protein synthesis inhibitors acting on ribosomal subunits 30S 
 
 
Aminoglycosides 
 
 
Tetracyclines 
 
C. Protein synthesis inhibitors acting on ribosomal subunits 50S 
 
 
Macrolides and azalides 
 
 
Chloramphenicols 
 
 
Lincosamides 
 
D. Antibiotics which disturb functions of nucleic 
acids 1. Rifampicins 
 
E. Antibiotics which disturb the structure and functions of cell membranes 
 
 
Polyenes 
 
 
Cyclic polypeptides (polymyxins). 
 
ANTIBIOTICS-INHIBITORS OF CELL WALL SYNTHESIS 
 
The most important antibiotics of this group are the β-lactam antibiotics, 
named after the β-lactam ring which is essential to their activity (fig. 31.1). 
 
PENICILLINS 
 
Penicillins are derivatives of the 6-aminopenicillanic acid. The members of 
this family differs from one another in the substituent attached to the amino group 
of the 6-aminopenicillanic acid. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Natural penicillins (benzylpenicillin, penicillin G) 
 
 
A short acting 
 
–  Benzylpenicillin sodium (penicillin G) 
 
–  Benzylpenicillin potassium 
 
–  Penicillin V 
 
 
A long acting 
 
–  Penicillin G procaine 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
465
 
– Benzathine benzylpenicillin (Bicillin-1) 
 
– Benzathine benzylpenicillin + benzylpenicillin procaine 
+ Benzylpenicillin sodium (Bicillin-3) 
– Benzathine benzylpenicillin + benzylpenicillin procaine (Bicillin-5) 
B. Semisynthetic penicillins 
 
A penicillinase resistant 
 
–  Oxacillin 
 
 
A wide spectrum 
 
–  Ampicillin 
 
–  Amoxicillin 
 
–  Carbenicillin 
 
 
Combined penicillins 
 
–  Ampiox 
 
–  Amoxiclav (Augmentin). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 31.1. Chemical structure of β-lactam antibiotics. 
 
BENZYLPENICILLIN SODIUM 
 
Benzylpenicillin sodium (penicillin G) is a natural substance produced by 
 
fungus Penicillium notatum. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
is destroyed by gastric juice (fig. 31.2), that’s why is administered IM, 
IV, endolumbally 
 
is widely distributed through the body 
 
 
penetrates CNS only in the conditions of meningitis; penetrates placenta 
without negative influence on the fetus 
 
is excreted with urine 
 
 
acts during 4-6 hrs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 31.2. Site of cleavage of penicillin by acid or by 
 
bacterial penicillinase (by. H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
In bacteria, there are several integral proteins in the cell membrane that 
provide numerous functions: 1) transpeptidase activity -- this permits cross-
linking in the formation of the cell wall; 2) contribute to the shape of the 
bacteria; 3) contribute to septum formation during replication/division; 4) the 
inhibition the action of autolysin (an enzyme that causes the destruction 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
467
 
of the bacteria). These proteins are the target for penicillin. They are 
referred to penicillin binding proteins or PBPs. 
 
 
Penicillin G binds directly to PBPs and inhibits the enzyme transpeptidase, 
thus inhibiting cell wall formation. The inhibition of this action will reduce 
the structural and functional integrity of the cell wall. The cell bursts from 
osmotic pressure because the integrity of peptidoglycan is not maintained 
 
(= a bactericidal action) (fig. 31.3). 
 
 
Benzylpenicillin only acts on organisms in the stage of growth and division. 
 
 
Bacteria may be resistant or develop resistance to penicillin by a variety 
of mechanisms: the structure of the cell wall may provide resistance to a 
drug effect; the PBP may undergo modification, decreasing the binding 
affinity for the antibiotic; the production of β-lactamase (penicillinase) 
provides destruction of the antibiotic before it may exert its effect. 
 
 
Cell wall 
 
Cell membrane 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bacterium 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cross-linked 
by 
transpeptidase 
 
Inhibition of 
Amino acid 
chain 
Cell wall 
cell wall synthesis 
Sugar 
building block 
 
Fig. 31.3. Mechanism of bactericidal action of penicillins (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Spectrum of action 
 
It has a narrow spectrum of action: Gram (+) and Gram (-) cocci 
(streptococci, 
some 
staphylococci, 
gonococci, 
meningococci), 
clostridia, 
corynebacteria, listeria, spirochetas, leptospira. 

468 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Indications 
 
 
Infections caused by streptococci (angina, scarlet fever, rheumatism) 
 
 
Meningitis (caused by Meningococcus) 
 
 
Pneumonia (caused by Pneumococcus) 
 
 
Gonorrhea 
 
 
Syphilis 
 
 
Gangrene 
 
 
Diphtheria 
 
 
Infections of the skin and soft tissues 
 
 
Listeriosis 
 
 
Leptospirosis. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Allergic reactions which occur in 0.7-20% of patients taking penicillin and 
may range from rash, fever, through broncospasm, vasculitis, serum sick-
ness, exfoliative dermatitis, and Steven-Johnson syndrome to anaphylaxis 
 
 
Neurotoxicity (in a bigger dose). 
 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to penicillin. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Benzylpenicillin potassium is a short-acting natural penicillin similar to ben-
zylpenicillin sodium , but is not administered IV or endolumbally due to toxic 
action of potassium on CNS and the heart. 
 
Benzathine penicillin (Bicillin-1) is long-acting natural penicillin, has 
spectrum of action similar to the same of benzylpenicillin sodium, is administered 
only IM once a week for the treatment of chronic infections (pharigitis, tonsillitis, 
erysipelas, syphilis, rheumatism) and for prophylaxis of rheumatism relapse. 
 
Bicillin-3 is long-acting natural penicillin containig benzylpenicilln sodium 
(or potassium), benzatine benzylpenicillin, and benzylpenicillin procaine in the 
equal amounts, has spectrum of action similar to the spectrum of benzylpenicillin 
sodium, is administered only IM 1-2 times a week to treat chronic infections 
(pharigitis, tonsillitis, erysipelas, syphilis, rheumatism). 
 
Bicillin-5 is a long-acting natural penicillin, contains ¼ of benzylpenicillin pro-
caine and ¾ of Bicillin-1; has a spectrum of action similar to benzylpenicillin sodium, 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
469
 
is administered only IM once a month to treat chronic streptococcal and 
spirochetal infections. 
 
Oxacillin is semisynthetic penicillin, is an acid resistant and may be taken by 
mouth, is penicillinase-resistant and is effective against Staphylococcus spp.; is 
not as effective against the other organisms that older penicillins are effective 
against. Oxacillin and other penicillinase-resistant penicillins (meticillin, nafcillin) 
are only topically used in the skin infections caused by susceptible organisms. 
There are nu-merous strains that are now resistant to these agents - so-called 
methicillin-resistant staphylococci (MRSA). 
 
Ampicillin is semisynthetic penicillin, is an acid resistant and may be taken by 
mouth, as well as IM and IV, is destroyed by penicillinase of staphylococci; has a wide 
spectrum of action: is more effective against Gram (-) organisms than the older drugs 
of the class (These include Haemophilus influenzae, Escherichia coli, and Proteus 
mirabilis); is most often used in the treatment of urinary tract infections, respiratory 
tract infections, and otitis media caused by susceptible organisms 
 
Amoxicillin is a wide spectrum penicillin, is an active metabolite of 
ampicillin, has a better bioavailability in comparison to ampicillin. 
 
Carbenicillin, piperacillin are extended spectrum penicillins, are more active 
against Gram (-) and anaerobic organisms including Pseudomonas spp., Enterobacter 
spp., and Proteus spp.; are used primarily in the treatment of infections caused by 
susceptible organisms, often associated with bacteræmia and burns. Piperacillin shows 
the greatest activity against Pseudomonas and Klebsiella spp. 
 
Ampiox is a combined preparation containing ampicillin and oxacillin, that’s 
why it has a wide spectrum and acts on staphylococci. 
 
Amoxiclav is a combined preparation containing ampicillin and clavulanic 
acid (β-lactamase inhibitor), may be used to treat infections caused by penicillin 
resistant microbes. 
 
CEPHALOSPORINS 
 
Cephalosporins are derivatives of the 7-aminocepalosporanic acid and 
contain β-lactam ring (fig.31.1). 
They are wide spectrum antibiotics with a bactericidal action. Mechanism of 
action is similar to that of penicillins. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 The 1st generation 
 
–  Cefazolin (Kefzol) 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
–  Cephaloridine 
 
–  Cephalexin 
 
 The 2nd generation 
 
–  Cefamandole 
 
–  Cefuroxime 
 
–  Cefaclor 
 
 The 3rd generation 
 
–  Cefotaxime 
 
–  Ceftriaxone 
 
–  Cefixime 
 
–  Cefazidime 
 
– Cefoperazone 
 
 The 4th generation 
 
–  Cefpirome. 
 
Spectrum of action 
 
Cephalosporins of the 1st generation act on Gram (+) cocci including staphy-
lococci resistant to penicillins, Gram (-) cocci, some Gram (-) bacilli. They are not 
effective against MRSA. 
 
Cephalosporins of the 2nd generation act on Gram (-) bacilli including 
Enterobacter, Klebsiella, Haemophilus, and Proteus spp., but they are less active 
against Gram (+) cocci. Some preparations (cefoxitin, cefmetazole) are effective 
against Bacteroides spp. 
 
Cephalosporins of the 3rd generation act on Gram (+) cocci, Gram (-) cocci, 
as well as on Gram (-) bacilli; they are more resistant to the effects of β-lactamase. 
Ceftazidime and Cefoperazone are also effective against Pseudomonas. 
 
Cephalosporins of the 4th generation have the spectrum similar to the 3rd 
generation, they are also effective against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and anaerobic 
bacteria. They are alternative antibiotics. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Severe respiratory infections 
 
 
Urinary tract infections 
 
 
Gynecologic infections 
 
 
Osteomyelitis 
 
 
Infections of the skin and soft tissues 
 
 
Sepsis 
 
 
Peritonitis 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
471
 
 
The prophylaxis of infectious complications of surgeries 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Allergy (there is some cross-sensitivity with the penicillins: 1-20% of pa-
tients exhibit sensitivity to both classes of antibiotics) 
 
Dyspepsia 
 
 
Renal disturbances (cephaloridine is the worst offender) 
 
 
Changes in the blood film, the suppression of the bone marrow resulting 
in granulocytopenia (relatively rare) 
 
A decrease in the prothrombin amount in blood 
 
 
Dysbacteriasis (for drugs administered orally). 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Cefazolin is from the 1st generation; is administered IM, IV; acts during 8-12 
hrs, is excreted unchanged with urine; is used to treat infections of the respiratory 
pathways, urinary pathways, bones, skin and soft tissues, may be used for the 
preven-tion of infection before the surgery; has low nephrotoxicity. 
 
Cephalexin is less active than other preparations of the 1st generation, but it is 
taken orally. 
Cefotaxime is the 3rd generation cephalosporin; is administered IM 2-3 times 
a day, well penetrates CNS, tissues, and liquids of the body; is used in severe 
infec-tions of the respiratory and urinary pathways, sepsis, meningitis, 
osteomyelitis; is the antibiotic of choice in infections caused by non-identified 
microbes, may be applied for prophylaxis of infection before the surgery. 
 
Ceftriaxone is more active than other preparations of the 3rd generation; is admin-
istered IM or IV 1-2 times a day; has indications similar to indications of cefotaxime. 
Cefoperazone is a 3rd-generation cephalosporin antibiotic, one of few cepha-
losporins effective in treating Pseudomonas bacterial infections. It is also used as a 
co-formulation with sulbactam. Cefoperazone exerts its bactericidal effect by 
inhib-iting the bacterial cell wall synthesis, and sulbactam acts as β-lactamase 
inhibitor, to increase the antibacterial activity of cefoperazone against β-
lactamase-producing organisms. The drug is administered IM or IV every 12 hrs. 
It can cause hypopro-thrombinemia and disulfiram-like reaction as side effects. 
 
Cefpirome is highly effective against Gram-positive and Gram-negative aerobic 
and anaerobic microorganisms: Escherichia coli, Salmonella spp., Shigella spp., 
Proteus mirabilis, Proteus vulgaris, Providencia, Morganella morganii, Citrobacter 
freundii, Klebsiella oxytoca, Serratia spp., Enterobacter spp., Haemophilus influen-
zae, Neisseria spp., Moraxella catarrhalis, Streptococcus spp., Staphylococcus spp., 
Peptostreptococcus spp., Clostridium perfringens, Pseudomonas aeruginosa. As a 
representative of the 4th generation cephalosporins, it is resistant to the action of 

472 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
known β-lactamases. When administered IV, it remains in the blood in a therapeutic 
concentration for 12 hrs and penetrates well into the tissues and body fluids. The drug 
is used for infections of the urinary system, skin and soft tissues, pneumonia, lung 
abscess, pleural empyema, septicemia, infections in patients with impaired immunity. 
Side effects include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, transient increase liver transaminases, 
leukopenia, transient increase in the concentration of urea and creatinine in the blood 
plasma, phlebitis at the injection site, and allergic reactions. 
 
CARBAPENEMS 
 
Imipenem and Meropenem are carbapenems (fig. 31.1): 
 
 
act in a manner identical to the penicillins and cephalosporins 
 
 
Imipenem is given with the agent cilastatin. Imipenem is rapidly metabo-
lised by renal dehydropeptidases. Cilastatin inhibits this renal metabolism, 
promoting renal reabsorption and an extended half-life of the drug 
 
Meropenem demonstrates a long half-life with higher blood levels and 
therefore does not require the co-administration of cilastatin 
 
have the broadest spectrum of action: Gram (+), Gram (-) 
microorganisms, anaerobs, Pseudomonas aerugirosa. They are extremely 
resistant to the actions of β-lactamase 
 
are used in the treatment of urinary tract infections, lower respiratory 
tract infections, gynecological infections, and soft tissue infections 
caused by susceptible organisms 
 
may cause nausea, vomiting, and rarely, seizures in high doses 
(meropenem is less likely to cause seizures). 
 
MONOBACTAMS 
 
Aztreonam is an antibiotic from the monobactams group: 
 
 
has the mechanism of action similar to other β-lactams 
 
 
has a narrow spectrum of action; is highly effective against Gram (-) organ-
isms, especially enterobacteria; is resistant to the action of β-lactamases 
 
 
is well tolerated with minimal side effects: there is no cross sensitivity 
with the β-lactam antibiotics. 
 
GLYCOPEPTIDES 
 
Vancomycin is an antibiotic from the glycopeptides group: 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
473
 
 
binds to the D-alanyl-D-alanine terminus of the glycopeptide polymer, 
in-hibiting a loss of the terminal D-alanine, inhibits cross-linking and 
weakens the cell wall of the microorganism 
 
 
is bactericidal in action 
 
 
has activity against Gram (+) organisms including those that produce 
penicillinase, some Gram (-) and anaerobic bacteria; is effective against 
methicillin-resistant staphylococci 
 
 
is used for the parenteral administration in serious infections and orally in 
the treatment of pseudomembranous colitis; may be applied in patients 
with serious allergy to β-lactams; is used prophylactically in dental 
patients, as well as in patients with the prosthetic heart valves 
 
 
may cause vancomycin flush syndrome (after rapid IV infusion) 
character-ised by flushing, hypotension, tachycardia due to histamine 
release. Other adverse effects include hypersensitivity, chill, fever, rash, 
and, in high doses, ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity. 
 
β-LACTAMASE INHIBITORS 
 
Clavulanic acid, sulbactam, tazobactam are β-lactamase inhibitors. The 
spec-trum of penicillins may be extended to include β-lactamase producing 
bacteria by the addition of agents which inhibit the lactamase enzyme and 
preserve the structural integrity of the β-lactam antibiotic. These will allow the use 
of penicillins in peni-cillase producing resistant organisms, but will not be 
beneficial in organisms with altered PBP characteristics. 
 
 
ANTIBIOTICS – INHIBITORS OF PROTEIN SYNTHESIS 
 
AMINOGLYCOSIDES 
 
Aminoglycosides are compounds containing amino sugars joined to a hexose 
nucleus in glycosidic linkage (fig. 31.4). They are polar compounds of 
polycationic structure and are used in the form of sulfates. 

474 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 31.4. Chemical structure of streptomycin. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 The 1st generation 
–  Streptomycin 
–  Neomycin 
–  Kanamycin 
 The 2nd generation 
–  Gentamycin 
 The 3rd generation 
–  Amikacyn. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
are not absorbed after oral administration 
 
must be given parenterally for a systemic effect 
 
have limited tissue penetration 
 
are distributed in all extracellular fluids, but tissue concentrations are 
low, except in the kidney and ear 
 
cross the blood-brain barrier only in meningitis 
 
are excreted with urine. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Aminoglycosides bind irreversibly to the 30S subunit of bacterial 
ribosomes (fig. 31.5). 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
475
wrong amino acid 
fMet 
His 
 
 
 
 
30S 
 
misreading of 
 
codon by tRNA 
 
U A C 
G U G 
G  G  A 
U 
A U G 
30S  C G C 
aminoglycoside 
codon for Arg 
 
Fig. 31.5. Aminoglycosides’ mechanism of action (http://www.picsearch.com). 
 
 
They prevent the formation of an initiation complex with the messenger RNA 
 
 
They reduce the rejection rate for tRNAs that are near matches for the co-
don. This leads to the misreading of the codons or premature termination 
of protein synthesis. 
 
Aminoglycosides inhibit protein synthesis. 
 
 
They increase membrane leakage. 
 
 
They have bactericidal type of action. 
 
 
They are capable of exerting such a postantibiotic effect that their killing 
action continues when their plasma levels have declined below 
measurable levels. 
 
Aminoglycosides have greater efficacy when administered as a single 
large dose than when given as multiple smaller doses. 
 
Aminoglycosides transport into the cell can be enhanced by cell wall syn-
thesis inhibitors that may be the basis of antimicrobial synergism. 
 
Spectrum of action 
 
The antibacterial spectrum is broad. It includes only aerobic organisms because 
anaerobes lack the oxygen requiring the transport system. Aminoglycosides act on 
Gram (-) bacilli: Proteus, Pseudomonas, Serratia, Escherihia coli, Klebsiela pneu-
moniae, Francisella tularensis, Yersinia pestis, some Gram (+) cocci: Enterococci, 

476 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Streptococci, some strains of Staphylococcus. Kanamycin, amikacin, streptomycin 
have some activity against Mycobacterum tuberculosis. 
 
Resistance is connected with decreased uptake of the drug, an altered receptor 
for the binding of aminoglycoside to the 30S ribosomal subunit, and the plasmid 
associated synthesis of enzymes that modify and inactivate the antibiotic. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Pneumonia 
 
 
Chronic urinary tract infections 
 
 
Infections due to Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
 
 
Tularemia 
 
 
Tuberculosis. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Streptomycin is effective against the organisms which cause plague, 
tularemia and, in combination with penicillin, against Gram (+) enterococci and 
streptococci; suppresses tubercle bacilli; is used very seldom in tuberculosis, 
subacute bacterial endocarditis, tularemia, and plague, severe cases of brucellosis. 
 
Neomycin is effective against many Gram (-) species and several Gram (+) 
bacteria (e.g. S. aureus); because of its serious toxic effects, it is used topically to 
treat wounds. infected burns, skin diseases; can be used orally for the prevention 
of infection before gastrointestinal surgery or for the treatment of enterocolitis. 
 
Gentamycin is bactericidal against a wide variety of Gram (-) organisms, 
includ-ing Proteus, Pseudomonas, Serratia, and some strains of Staphylococcus; 
is used IM, IV, and topically in the treatment of many infections caused by: 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Serratia, Enterobacter, Klebsiella; methicillin-resistant 
staphylococci; is the most nephrotoxic among the aminoglycosides. 
 
Amikacin has a spectrum of activity similar to that of gentamycin , but is 
often reserved for situations in which resistance to gentamycin emerges; is active 
against M. tuberculosis and is an alternative preparation in this disease. 
 
Kanamycin has a more limited spectrum of activity than gentamycin. It is 
inef-fective against Pseudomonas and most Gram (-) organisms, but is active 
against M. tuberculosis and can be used as 2nd-line preparation in this disease. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Ototoxicity 
 
 
Nephrotoxicity 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
477
 
 
Neurotoxic effects, including dysfunction of the optic nerve, 
neuromuscular junction blockade when an aminoglycoside is given at high doses 
or in combination with antidepolarizing drugs. 
 
 
Allergic reactions. 
 
TETRACYCLINES 
 
Tetracyclines contain 4 heterocyclic rings in their molecules (fig.31.6). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 31.6. Chemical structure of tetracyclines. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 Natural 
 
–  Tetracycline 
 
 Semisynthetic 
 
–  Doxycycline 
 
–  Methacycline. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
are absorbed from the GI tract, particularly from the stomach and the 
upper small intestine: oral absorption is variable and may be impaired by 
food and multivalent cations (calcium, iron, aluminium) 
 
 
penetrate CNS, but the levels are insufficient for therapeutic efficacy 
 
 
have a wide tissue distribution 
 
 
cross the placental barrier and concentrate in fetal bones and dentition 
 
 
undergo entero-hepatic cycling 
 
 
concentrate in bones and dental bone, in the liver, and some malignant tu-
mors. The drugs are deposited in the teeth and bones because of their chelat-
ing properties and form a tetracycline-calcium orthophosphate complex 
 
 
are eliminated primarily in the urine; doxycycline is excreted mainly in feces. 

478 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Tetracyclines are transported into the microbial cell by transport proteins 
unique to the bacterial inner cytoplasmic membrane. 
 
The drugs bind to 30S ribosomal subunits. 
 
 
They block access of the amino acyl-tRNA to the mRNA-ribosome 
complex at the acceptor site and inhibit protein synthesis (fig. 31.7) 
 
 
 
 
mRNA 
Ribosome 
Tetracyclines 
tRNA 
Amino acid 
Insertion of 
incorrect 
amino acid 
Peptide chain 
Aminoglycosides 
 
Fig. 31.7. Mechanism of action of tetracyclines in comparison with 
 
the mechanism of action of aminoglycosides (by. H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
 
They interact with ions of bivalent metals and disturb tissue respiration in 
microbes; are the antagonists of riboflavin. 
 
They are bacteriostatic. 
 
 
Resistance to tetracyclines is due to the inability of microbes to accumulate 
the drug, as well as to the modification of the tetracycline binding site. 
 
Spectrum of action 
 
Tetracyclines are broad-spectrum antibiotics with activity against Gram (+) 
bac-teria (Corynebactrium acnes), Gram (-) enteric rods, Gram (-) bacilli 
(Haemophylus influenzae, Vibrio cholerae), rickettsiae, chlamydiae, mycoplasma, 
spirochetes (Borrelia burgdorferi, Treponema pallidum), actinomyces, and some 
protozoa (Amoebae). 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
479
 
Indications 
 
 
Rickettsial infections including: Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Brill's 
disease, murine and scrub typhus 
 
Chlamydial infections (lymphogranuloma venereum, psittacosis, trachoma) 
 
 
Mycoplasmal infections 
 
 
Bacillary infections (brucellosis, tularemia, cholera, some Shigella and 
Salmonella infections) 
 
Venereal infections 
 
 
Amebiasis 
 
 
Lyme disease. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Gastrointestinal disturbances 
 
 
Hepatic dysfunction 
 
 
Dermatitis, phototoxicity 
 
 
Teratogenic action (“tetracycline teeth”) 
 
 
Yellow-brown discoloration of the teeth and depressed bone growth if 
tetracyclines are given to children 
 
A pseudotumor of the brain 
 
 
Dysbacteriasis and superinfection which can result in staphylococcal en-
terocolitis, candidiasis, and pseudomembranous colitis. 
 
Stomatitis, gingivitis. 
 
Contraindications 
 
 
Diseases of the liver and kidney 
 
 
Pregnancy 
 
 
Children younger than 8 years old. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Tetracycline is administered orally 3-4 times daily or applied topically (oint-
ment), has the bioavailability of 66%, binds to plasma proteins (65%), penetrates 
different tissues and body fluids, crosses the blood-brain barrier and placenta, is 
not metabolized, is excreted with urine (60%) and feces (20-30%), 
 
Doxycycline is used in the form of hydrochloride; is administered orally and 
by IV infusion, binds to plasma proteins (90%), is metabolized in the liver, has a 
half-life of 18-24 hrs thus the preparation may be given once a day; developes 
high concentration in the eye, prostate, testis, uterus, urinary bladder, bile, liver, 
bones, teeth, lungs, lymphoid tissue; is excreted with urine (40% of the dose). 

480 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
CHLORAMPHENICOLS 
 
CHLORAMPHENICOL 
 
Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol) is a nitrobenzene derivative (fig.31.8). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 31.8. Chemical structure of chloramphenicol. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, applied topically (ointment, eye drops) 
 
 
is absorbed rapidly from the GI tract 
 
 
undergoes entero-hepatic cycling 
 
 
is widely distributed in body fluids and reaches therapeutic levels in the 
cerebrospinal fluid; is also present in bile and milk 
 
is metabolized in the liver by glucuronyl transferase 
 
 
is excreted with urine in the form of metabolites. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Chloramphenicol binds to the 50S ribosomal subunit, blocks peptide syn-
thetase and disturbs elongation of peptide chain (fig. 31.9). 
 
The drug is primarily bacteriostatic although it may be bactericidal to 
some strains. 
 
Spectrum of action 
 
Chloramphenicol has a wide spectrum of antimicrobial activity, including: many 
Gram (-) organisms; anaerobic organisms (Bacteroides species); Meningococcus, 
some strains of Streptococcus and Staphylococcus (at a high antibiotic concentration); 
spirochetes, Clostridium, Chlamydia, Mycoplasma; rickettsiae. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Typhoid fever and salmonella infections 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
481
 
 
Bacterial meningitis 
 
 
Anaerobic infections 
 
 
Rickettsial diseases 
 
 
Brucellosis; 
 
 
Infections of the skin and soft tissues 
 
 
Bacterial conjunctivitis 
 
 
Clamidial infections (trachoma). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Peptide 
 
synthetase 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chloramphenicol 
 
 
 
Fig. 31.9. Mechanism of action of chloramphenicol (by. H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Allergic reactions 
 
 
The inhibition of leukopoesis and erythropoesis 
 
 
Superinfections including candidiasis and acute staphylococcal enterocolitis. 
 
 
A gastrointestinal upset 
 
 
The gray-baby syndrome (this condition is seen in neonates, especially 
premature infants, who have been given relatively large doses of 
chloram-phenicol. 
Cyanosis, 
respiratory 
irregularities, 
vasomotor 
collapse, abdominal distention, loose green stools, and an ashen-grey 
color characterize this often fatal syndrome. The condition develops 
because of the immature hepatic conjugating mechanism and the 
inadequate mechanism for renal excretion in neonates) 
 
 
Endotoxic reactions. 

482 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
MACROLIDES AND AZALIDES 
 
Macrolides and azalides are the antibiotics that have a large lactone ring 
struc-ture. These may be 14- or 16-membered rings. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 The 1st generation 
 
–  Erythromycin 
 
 The 2nd generation 
 
–  Azithromycin 
 
–  Clarithromycin 
 
–  Spiramycin. 
 
ERYTHROMYCIN 
 
Erythromycin is the first generation macrolide (fig. 31.10). It was the first 
drug in this family. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 31.10. Chemical structure of erythromycin. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken by mouth and applied topically (ointment) 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
483
 
 
is destroyed by gastric juice, that’s why erythromycin doses are given as 
either enteric coated or as more stable salts or esters 
 
is very rapidly absorbed 
 
 
is diffused into most tissues and phagocytes; due to the high concentration in 
phagocytes, it is actively transported to the site of infection where large 
concentrations of erythromycin are released during active phagocytosis 
 
 
is metabolised by demethylation in the liver 
 
 
is excreted with bile (mainly) and with urine (a small portion) 
 
 
has a half-life of 1,5 hrs. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Erythromycin binds to the 50S ribosomal subunit and inhibits peptidyl 
transferase activity. 
 
It blocks the translocation of peptidyl-tRNA from the acceptor site to the 
donor site. The incoming charged tRNA cannot access the occupied acceptor 
site, so the next amino acid cannot be added to the peptide chain (fig.31.11). 
 
 
It is usually bacteriostatic, but can be bactericidal in certain situations. 
 
 
Resistance is connected with the inability of microbes to take up the anti-
biotic, decreased affinity of 50S ribosomal subunit for the antibiotic, and 
the presence of erythromycin esterase. 
 
Spectrum of action 
 
Erythromycin has activity against many species of Campylobacter, Chlamydia, 
Mycoplasma, Legionella, spirochetes, Gram (+) cocci, and some Gram (-) organisms. 
Its antimicrobial spectrum is similar to the spectrum of penicillin. 
 
This drug is an alternative antibiotic to penicillin in patients who are allergic 
to β-lactam antibiotics. 

484 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
Erythromycin 
no peptide bond formation 
fMet 
Arg 
fMet 
Arg 
 
 
 
 
 
U  A C 
G  C G 
U  A C 
G  C G 
A  U G 
C G  C 
G G A 
U C 
A  U G 
C G  C 
G G A 
U  C 
 
 
 
Fig. 31.11. Mechanism of action of erythromycin (http/www.picksearch.com). 
 
Indications 
 
 
Non-severe infections of the respiratory system, synusitis, otitis 
 
 
Pneumonia due to Mycoplasma 
 
 
Legionnaires' disease 
 
 
Diphtheria 
 
 
Urogenital infection due to Ureaplasma 
 
 
Chlamidial infections 
 
 
Syphilis 
 
 
Acne. 
 
Side-effects 
 
Erythromycin has a very low incidence of serious side-effects: 
 
 
Cholestatic hepatitis, jaundice 
 
 
Epigastric distress 
 
 
Ototoxicity (transient deafness). 
 
Contraindications 
 
1. The decreased liver function. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Clarithromicin is taken by mouth; is absorbed in the gut on 55% that does 
not depend on meals, is widely distributed in the body except CNS, is metabo-
lized in the liver with the formation of active metabolite, is excreted with urine, 
has a half-life of 4 hrs; has an increased activity compared to erythromycin; is 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
485
 
active against Streptococcus agalactiae, Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus 
viridans, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influezae, Neisseria gonor-rhoeae, 
Listeria 
monocytogenes, 
Legionella 
pneumophila, 
Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae, 
Helicobacter pylori, Campilobacter jejuni, Chlamydia pneumoniae, Chlamydia 
trachomatis, Moraxella catarrhalis, Bordetella pertussis, Propionibacterium acnes, 
Mycobacterium avium, Mycobacterium leprae, Staphylococcus aureus, Ureaplasma 
urealyticum, Toxoplasma gondii.; is used to treat bronchitis, pneumonia (including 
mycoplasmial atypical pneumonia), infections of the nose, ear, and throat, synusitis, 
infections of the skin and soft tissues, the eradication of Helicobacter pylori. 
 
Azithromycin is administered orally with bioavailability of 37% due to first-
pass-metabolism; develops maximal concentration in 2,5 -3 hrs, displays tissues 
concentration exceeding that in blood plasma in 10- 100 times; concentrates in 
phagocytes; has a half-life of 14-20 hrs, is metabolized in the liver; is excreted 
with urine unchanged (50%) and in the form of metabolites; has an increased 
activity compared to erythromycin; has a broad spectrum of action which is 
similar to the spectrum of clarithromycin; does not act on microbes resistant to 
erythromycin; has indications like clarithromycin; is well tolerated. 
 
Spiramycin is natural antibiotic, the first representative of 16-member mac-
rolides. It is administered orally and IV. Absorption for oral administration is incom-
plete; bioavailability is 33-39%, reaches high concentrations in the lungs, bronchi, 
tonsils, sinuses and pelvic organs of women. An increased concentration is also found 
in bile, polymorphonuclear neutrophils and macrophages. Unlike other macrolides, the 
metabolism is unrelated to the cytochrome P450 system. 80% of a dose is excreted 
with bile. It acts bacteriostatically, but can act bactericidally at high doses: suppresses 
protein synthesis in the microbial cell due to reversible binding to the ribosome 50S 
subunit. In contrast to the 14-member macrolides has a longer antibacterial effect. 
Spiramycin has immunomodulatory properties characterized by an increase in the 
neutrophils phagocytic activity, a decrease in the lymphocytes transformation, and an 
increase in the production of interleukin-6. The drug is characterized by prolonged 
post-antibiotic effect as well as pro-antibiotic effect. Spiramycin is present in the cells 
in the active state, as a result of which there is a high clinical effectiveness even in the 
case of infections caused by microorganisms that are weakly susceptible to it in vitro – 
"spiramycin paradox". Spectrum of action includes: Streptococcus pyogenes, 
Streptococcus viridans, Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Staphylococcus aureus, 
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Enterococcus, Neisseria meningitidis, Bordetella pertussis, 
Campylobacter, Clostridium, Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria gonor-rhoeae, 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia trachomatis, Toxoplasma gondii, Legionella 
pneumophila, Spirochaetes. Indications are toxoplasmosis, bacterial 

486 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
infections (second line drug) caused by sensitive microorganisms; prevention of 
meningococcal meningitis among persons who have been in contact with patients, 
prevention of acute joint rheumatism, treatment of bacterial carriage of pertussis 
and diphtheria. Possible side effects are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, allergic 
reactions, cholestatic hepatitis, acute colitis, and ulcerative esophagitis. 
 
LINCOSAMIDES 
 
The lincosamides include lincomycin (fig. 31.12) and clindamycin. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 31.12. Chemical structure of lincomycin. 
 
 
are administered orally and parenterally, penetrate most tissues, including 
bone, concentrate in phagocytic cells, pass through the placental barrier, 
are metabolized in the liver and excreted with urine 
 
 
bind to the 50S ribosomal subunit and block peptide bond formation; 
have bacteriostatic type of action 
 
are very active against staphylococci, streptococci, and obligate anaerobic 
pathogens 
 
are used to treat infections of bones (osteomyelitis), respiratory organs, 
the urinary tract, anaerobic abdominal infections caused by Bacteroides. 
Clindamycin is also used in ulcer disease 
 
 
may cause side-effects, such as pseudomembranous colitis resulting in 
diarrhea, abdominal pain, fever, and admixtures of the mucus and blood 
in the stool; allergic reactions. 
 
STEROIDS 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
487
 
Fusidic acid (or Fusidin-sodium) is an antibiotic of steroid structure. 
 
 
is a protein synthesis inhibitor, acts by the preventing the translocation of 
peptidyl tRNA 
 
 
influences Gram (+) microbes (Staphylococcus and Streptococcus) 
 
 
is osteotropic 
 
 
is an alternative antibiotic to treat Gram (+) infections 
 
 
is usually administered in combination with another antibiotic, because of 
easily selected resistant mutants during monotherapy with the fusidic acid. 
 
 
ANTIBIOTICS WHICH DISTURB 
 
FUNCTIONS OF NUCLEIC ACIDS 
 
RIFAMICINS 
 
Rifampin (Rifampicinum) belongs to the group of complex macro cyclic an-
tibiotics (fig. 31.13). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 31.13. Chemical structure of rifampin. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is given orally 
 
 
is well absorbed in the GI tract 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
is distributed to most body tissues, including CNS 
 
 
undergoes entero-hepatic cycling and is partially metabolized in the liver; 
is the inducer of microsomal oxidation 
 
is eliminated mainly in feces (both free drug and metabolites). 
 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
It inhibits the RNA synthesis in bacteria and chlamydiae by binding to DNA-
dependent-RNA polymerase (fig. 31.14). 
 
RIFAMPIN 
DNA-dependent-RNA polymerase 
 
 
 
 
RNA 
 
synthesis 
 
Fig. 31.14. Mechanism of action of rifampin. 
 
Spectrum of action 
 
Most Gram (+) and many Gram (-) microorganisms are sensitive to rifampin. 
It is highly effective against Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium leprae. 
Prolonged administration of the drug as the single therapeutic agent promotes the 
emergency of highly resistant organisms. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Tuberculosis (in combination with other agents) 
 
 
Atypical mycobacterial infections 
 
 
Leprosy 
 
 
Bacterial infections caused by sensitive microbes: pneumonia, 
cholecystitis, osteomyelitis, etc. (as an alternative antibiotic). 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Red discoloration of urine, sweat, tears, and contact lenses 
 
 
Proteinuria and impaired antibody response 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
489
 
 
Changes in the half-life of a number of co-administered drugs 
metabolized by cytochrome P-450 system 
 
Rash 
 
 
Gastrointestinal disturbances 
 
 
Renal damage 
 
 
Jaundice and severe hepatic dysfunction. 
 
ANTIBIOTICS INFLUENCING 
 
STRUCTURE OF MEMBRANES 
 
POLYENES 
 
Nystatin and Amphotericin B are polyene antibiotics. Their chemical 
structure is like that of unsatureted fatty acids (fig. 31.15). These antibiotics are 
antifungals and decribed also in Chapter 30. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 31.15. Chemical structure of nystatin. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
The drugs are fungistatic and fungicidal 
 
 
They bind to sterols, especially ergosterol which is present in the 
membrane of fungi. As a result, the drugs appear to form channels in the 
membrane which allow small molecules to leak out of the cell. This 
disturbs the chemi-cal intracellular contents. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 

490 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Nystatin is poorly absorbed from the GI tract; is used orally and topically; 
has a narrow spectrum of action; influences Candida albicans; is used to treat 
Candida infections of the skin, mucous membranes, and intestinal tract: thrush 
(oral candi-diasis) and vaginitis are treated by topical application, whereas 
intestinal candidiasis is treated by oral administration; is well tolerated. 
 
Amphotericin B is administered by IV infusion and applied topically; is a broad-
spectrum antifungal agent effective against Histoplasma capsulatum, Cryptococcus 
neoformans, Coccidioides immitis, Candida species, Blastomyces dermatitidis, some 
strains of Aspergillus and Sporotrichum; it is the most effective drug available for 
systemic fungal infections; it is frequently used for the treatment of life-threatening 
fungal infections in patient with impaired defence mechanisms; pulmonary, cutaneous, 
and disseminated forms of blastomycosis; acute pulmonary coccidioidomycosis; pul-
monary histoplasmosis; Cryptococcus neoformans infections, candidiasis, including 
disseminated forms; may cause side-effects, such as hypersensitivity reactions, ana-
phylaxis, fever, chill, headache, gastrointestinal disturbances; decreased renal function 
(in over 80% of patients treated with amphotericin B), anemia and thrombophlebitis. 
 
POLYPEPTIDES (POLYMYXINS) 
 
Polymyxins M and B are polypeptides used in the form of sulfates. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Polymyxins interact with a specific lipopolysaccharide component of the 
cell membrane. 
 
The membrane lipid structure is distorted with an increase in permeability to 
polar molecules resulting in marked changes in cell metabolism. 
 
Spectrum of action 
 
The spectrum of action is narrow and includes Gram (-) bacteria (P. 
aeruginosa, Salmonella, Shigella, Escherihia coli, Pasteurella, Brucella, 
Haemophilus influen-zae, etc.) 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Polymyxin M is not absorbed in the GI tract; is administered orally (for the ac-
tion in the gut) and topically, is used to treat infected burns, wounds, skin diseases, 
intestinal infections, for the sterilization of bowels before surgeries; the topical 
administration of polymyxin M is not accompanied by denominated side-effects. 
 
Polymyxin B is administered parenterally; its clinical usage is limited to the 
therapy of resistant Gram (-) infections. Polymixin B is used in severe infections 

Chapter 31.  ANTIBIOTICS 
491
 
caused by Gram (-) bacilli: meningitis, sepsis, peritonitis; if it is absorbed into the 
systemic circulation, adverse effects include neurotoxicity (paresthesias, dizziness, 
ataxia) and acute renal tubular necrosis (hematuria, proteinuria, nitrogen retention). 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. The most long acting cephalosporin of 3rd generation is: 
 
 
Cefalexin 
 
 
Cefasolin 
С. Ceftriaxone 
 
 
Cefaclor 
 
E. Cefpirome. 
 
№2. All the concerning the mechanism of action of penicillins is true, except: 
 
 
They inhibit cell wall synthesis 
 
 
They inhibit transpeptidase 
 
 
They have a bactericidal action 
 
 
They cause disturbances of the structure and function of the cell membrane 
 
 
They act on microbes in the growth phase. 
 
№3. Erythromycin is: 
 
 
Destroyed by the gastric acid 
 
 
Destroyed by intestinal enzymes 
 
 
Entered the phagocytes 
 
 
The crossing blood-brain barrier 
 
 
Mainly excreted with bile. 
 
№4. Tetracycline is stored in the body in: 
 
 
The liver 
 
 
Some malignant tumors 
 
 
Hairs, nails, skin 
 
 
Bones and dentition 
 
 
Fat tissue. 
 
№5. A 6-year old boy was admitted to hospital with pneumonia. The treatment 
with amoxicillin was not effective. Bacterial analysis revealed mycoplasmial 
pneumonia. Choose the most suitable drug for the treatment of this child. 
 
Tetracycline 
 
 
Azithromycin 
 
 
Bicillin-5 
 
 
Nystatin 

492 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
E. Oxacillin. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – C; № 2 – D; №3 – A, C, E; № 4 – A, B, D; № 5 – B. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
32 ANTISPIROCHETAL DRUGS. 
ANTIMYCOBACTERIAL DRUGS. 
ANTIVIRAL AGENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPIROCHETAL INFECTIONS AND THEIR TREATMENT 
 
Syphilis is one of the most widely spread spirochetal infections caused by 
Treponema palidum. It is a chronic infection developed in a few stages from the 
primary tissue affect to the systemic disorders in CNS and other organs. 
 
ANTISPIROCHETAL DRUGS 
 
Drugs for the treatment of syphilis and other spirochetal infections are named 
antispirochetal drugs. 
 
СLASSIFICATION 
 
A. Antibiotics 
 
 
Basis antibiotics 
 
–  Benzylpenicillin sodium 
 
–  benzylpenicillin (Bicillin-1) 
 
– Benzathine benzylpenicillin + benzylpenicillin (Bicillin-5) 
 
 
Alternative antibiotics 
 
–  Cefaloridine 
 
–  Erythromycin 
 
–  Chloramphenicol (Levomycetin) 
B. Bismuth preparations 
 
–  Bijochinol. 

494 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
ANTISPIROCHETAL ANTIBIOTICS 
 
Benzylpenicillin sodium is the inhibitor of the cell wall synthesis with short 
duration of action and a narrow spectrum. It is effective against Treponema 
palidum and used as the basis antibiotic in syphilis. 
 
Bicillins are long-acting natural penicillins which have a narrow spectrum of 
action and are administered IM once a week (Bicillin-1) or once a month (Bicillin-
3) for the treatment of syphilis. 
 
Cefaloridine is the 1st generation cephalosporin. It is the inhibitor of the cell wall 
synthesis with a wide spectrum of action. It is an alternative preparation in syphilis. 
Erythromycin is a macrolide antibiotic. It is a protein synthesis inhibitor 
whose spectrum of action is similar to the spectrum of benzylpenicillin. It is used 
as an alternative antibiotic in patients hypersensitive to basis antibiotics. 
 
Chloramphenicol is a wide spectrum antibiotic, a protein synthesis inhibitor. 
 
It may be used as an alternative antibiotic in syphilis. 
 
BISMUTH PREPARATIONS 
 
BIJOCHINOL 
 
 
is a compound between bismuth, iodine and quinine suspended in Oleum 
Persicorum 
 
is administered IM once per 3 days, accumulates in the body; is excreted 
with urine and saliva 
 
interacts with SH-groups of enzymes and has a bacteriostatic action on 
Treponema palidum 
 
is indicated for all stages of syphilis (together with benzylpenicillin), 
non-syphilitic encephalitis and myelitis 
 
may cause grey spots on gums, stomatitis, renal disturbances 
 
 
is contraindicated in patients with renal failure and diseases of the oral mucosa. 
 
TUBERCULOSIS AND ITS THERAPY 
 
Tuberculosis is a chronic infection caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. 
The treatment of tuberculosis is a serious problem due to some peculiarities of 
mycobacteria, such as: 
 
a slow growth 
 
 
the ability to be dormant and completely resistant to many drugs 
 
 
the impermeability of cell wall to many agents 
 
 
persistence in macrophages 

Chapter 32.
 
ANTISPIROCHETAL DRUGS. ANTIMYCOBACTERIAL DRUGS. ANTIVIRAL AGENTS
 
495 
 
 
 
the development of resistance to any single drug. 
 
General principles of chemotherapy of tuberculosis 
 
 
To begin the therapy with the 1st line drugs 
 
 
To use the 2nd line preparations after the development of drug resistance 
in microbes 
 
To apply 2-3 preparations together to delay or prevent the emergency of 
resistant strains 
 
To carry out a long lasting treatment (6-24 months) 
 
 
To continue the regimen after the disappearance of clinical disease to 
eradi-cate any persistant organisms 
 
To carry out laboratory monitoring of the efficacy of treatment. 
 
ANTIMYCOBACTERIAL DRUGS 
 
Antimycobacterial drugs are preparations to treat tuberculosis. Some of the 
most active drugs are effective in leprosy. 
 
CLINICAL CLASSIFICATION 
 
OF ANTIMYCOBACTERIAL DRUGS 
 
There are 2 groups of antimycobacterial drugs: the 1st line and the 2nd line 
preparations (fig. 32.1). The 1st line preparations have high efficacy and low toxic-
ity. The efficacy of the 2nd line preparations is lower, but they act on resistant 
strains of mycobacteria. 
 
 
 
Antimycobacterial drugs 
 
 
The 1st line preparations 
The 2st line preparations 
Isoniazid 
Aminosalicylic acid 
Rifampin 
Cycloserine 
Ethambutol 
Ethionamide 
Pirazinamide 
Ethionamide 
 
Fig. 32.1. Classification of antimycobacterial drugs according to their activity. 

496 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
ISONIAZID (INH) 
 
It is the hydrazide of the isonicotinic acid, a synthetic analog of pyridoxine 
(fig. 32.2). Isoniazid is the most potent anti-tubercular agent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 32.2. Chemical structure of isoniazid. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, IM, IV; absorption after the oral administration is 
impaired by food and antacids 
 
diffuses into the whole body: infected tissues tend to retain the drug longer 
 
 
penetrates CNS 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver by acetylation and hydrolysis; acetylation is 
genetically regulated: the fast acetylator trait is an autosomal dominant 
(fig. 32.3) 
 
 
is excreted with urine, parthialy with saliva, sputum, and milk. 
 
 
N-acetylation 
 
Rapid acetylators: 
Slow acetylators: 
half-life of isoniazid is 
half-life of isoniazid is 
about 1 hr 
about 3 hrs 
 
 
Fig. 32.3. Groups of patients according to speed of isoniazid’s acetylation. 
 
Mechanism of action 

Chapter 32.
 
ANTISPIROCHETAL DRUGS. ANTIMYCOBACTERIAL DRUGS. ANTIVIRAL AGENTS
 
497 
 
 
 
It disturbs the synthesis of the mycolic acids which are an important con-
stituent of the mycobacterial cell wall. 
 
It competes with vitamins B6, B1, PP. 
 
For bacilli in the stationary phase, isoniazid is bacteriostatic; for dividing 
bacilli, it is bactericidal. 
 
Isoniazid is effective against extracellular, as well as intracellular bacteria. 
 
 
When it is used alone, resistant organisms rapidly emerge. 
 
Spectrum of action 
 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
 
Indications 
 
It is used for all forms of diagnosed tuberculosis. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Hypersensitivity 
 
 
Peripheral neuritis (paresthesia) 
 
 
Mental abnormalities, psychotic episodes, euphoria, convulsions 
 
 
Optic neuritis 
 
 
Hepatitis 
 
Neurological side-effects are due to competition to B6 and pyridoxine deficiency. 
 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
RIFAMPIN 
 
It is a wide-spectrum antibiotic produced by Streptomyces. The drug interacts 
with the DNA-dependent-RNA polymerase, suppresses the initiation step of tran-
scription in procaryotes. It is bactericidal for both intracellular and extracellular 
my-cobacteria. Rifampin is the 1st line preparation in tuberculosis and the most 
effective anti-leprosy drug. For detail information – see Chapter 31. 
 
PYRAZINAMIDE 
 
 
is a pyrazine analog of nicotinamide 
 
 
is taken orally and widely disrtributed in the body, penetrates into CNS 
 
 
is transformed into the active form (the pyrazinoic acid) 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
has an unknown mechanism of action (probably the inhibition of oxygen 
dependent mycolic acid synthesis); acts on extra- and intracellular myco-
bacteria 
 
 
is the 1st line anti-tubercular preparation; is widely used in the multi-agent 
short-term therapy of uncomplicated pulmonary tuberculosis 
 
may cause the liver dysfunction and urate retention. 
 
 
ETHAMBUTOL 
 
 
is taken orally and widely disrtributed in the body, penetrates into CNS 
 
 
is ethylenimine derivative, blocks nucleic acids synthesis and inhibits 
arabi- nozyl transferases involved in the synthesis of arabinogalactan, a 
component of the mycobacterial cell wall 
 
 
is a bacteriostatic anti-tubercular agent 
 
 
is the 1st line anti-tubercular preparation 
 
 
may cause optic neuritis, a loss of ability to discriminate between red and 
green. 
 
ALTERNATIVE SECOND LINE DRUGS 
 
Aminosalicylic acid is a competitive inhibitor of PABA in folate metabolism, is 
bacteriostatic, is taken in a high dose (10-15g per day) and causes many side-effects 
(dyspepsia, crystalluria, the enlargement of the thyroid gland), is used rarely. 
 
Ethionamide is a structural analog of isoniazid, inhibits acetylation, may cause 
side-effects, such as hepatotoxicity, gastric irritation, peripheral and optic neuritis. 
 
Cycloserine is an antibiotic–inhibitor of the cell wall synthesis, is toxic; may 
cause CNS and peripheral neurological disturbances. 
 
Streptomycin is an aminoglycoside antibiotic, the inhibitor of protein synthesis, is 
used in drug combination for the treatment of life-threatening tuberculosis disease 
(meningitis, miliary dissemination, severe organ tuberculosis). 
 
Amikacin is an aminoglycoside antibiotic, is used for the treatment of tuber-
culosis caused by streptomycin-resistant strains, is applied in the combination drug 
regimen. 
 
Ciprofloxacine, ofloxacine are fluorquinolones, block DNA gyrase, are used 
as the 2nd line preparations in the combination drug regimen. 
 
VIRAL INFECTIONS AND THEIR CHEMOTHERAPY 

Chapter 32.
 
ANTISPIROCHETAL DRUGS. ANTIMYCOBACTERIAL DRUGS. ANTIVIRAL AGENTS
 
499 
 
 
Viruses are obligate intracellular parasites. They are small particles the main 
structure elements of which are the nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) and the protein 
coat (capsid), require the active participation of cell metabolism to survive. 
A life cycle of virus consists of adsorption and penetration, uncoating, early 
protein synthesis, nucleic acid synthesis, assembly and budding (release of 
virions). Viruses have some specific enzymes which are the targets for antiviral 
drugs (reverse transcriptase, HIV-specific protease, DNA polymerase). 
 
In the body there are natural antiviral substances interferons produced by im-
mune competent cells. 
 
ANTIVIRAL AGENTS 
 
Antiviral drugs are preparations for the treatment of viral infections. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
According to the mechanism of action 
 
 Inhibitors of attachment to host cell or penetration into host cell 
 
–  Amantadine 
 
–  Remantadine 
 
 Inhibitors of DNA polymerase 
 
–  Acyclovir 
 
–  Gancyclovir 
 
–  Famcyclovir 
 
– Valacyclovir 
 
–  Vidarabine 
 
 Inhibitors of RNA-dependent RNA polymerase 
 
– Ribavirin 
 
4. Reverse transcriptase inhibitors 
 
–  Zidovudine (azidothymidine, AZT) 
 
–  Didanosine 
 
–  Zalcitabine 
 
5. HIV protease inhibitors 
 
–  Saquinavir 
 
–  Ritonavir 
 
–  Nelfinavir 
 
–  Amprenavir 
 
6. Neuroaminidase inhibitors 
 
–  Zanamivir 

500 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
–  Oseltamivir 
 
7. Interferons and intrferon synthesis inductors 
 
–  Laferonum (IFN-α-2β) 
 
According to the clinical usage 
 
 For influenza and respiratory virus infections 
 
–  Amantadine, Remantadine 
 
–  Ribavirin 
 
–  Zanamivir and other neuroaminidase inhibitors 
 
 For herpes and cytomegalovirus infection 
 
–  Acyclovir and other inhibitors of DNA polymerase 
 
 For HIV infection 
 
–  Zidovudine and other reverse transferase inhibitors 
 
–  Sanquinvir and other HIV protease inhibitors 
 
 Preparations with a wide antiviral spectrum 
 
–  Laferonum and other interferons 
 
 
PREPARATIONS FOR TREATMENT OF INFLUENZA 
 
REMANTADINE 
 
It is a midantan derivative, structurally related to amantadine. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally 
 
 
does not penetrate into CNS 
 
 
is excreted by the cells of the epithelium of the upper respiratory pathways 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver 
 
 
is excreted with urine as a parent drug and metabolites. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
The drug blocks the viral membrane matrix protein M2 which functions as an 
ion channel (it is required for the fusion of the viral membrane with the cell mem-
brane) (fig. 32.4) 
 
It also inhibits the release of new virions. 

Chapter 32. 
ANTISPIROCHETAL DRUGS. ANTIMYCOBACTERIAL DRUGS. ANTIVIRAL 
AGENTS 501 
 
 
Spectrum of action 
 
The virus of influenza A2, the virus of encephalitis. 
 
Indications 
 
 
The treatment of influenza A2 
 
The prevention of influenza 
 
 
The prophylaxis of epidemic encephalitis. 
 
 
Influenza 
 
A-virus 
 
 
 
 
Endosome 
 
Viral channel 
protein 
 
H+ 
 
 
Inhibition of 
uncoating 
 
 
NH2 
 
Amantadine 
 
Fig. 32.4. Mechanism of action of midantan derivatives (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Headache 
 
 
Hallucinations 
 
 
Ataxia 
 
 
Disturbances of speesh 
 
 
Insomnia 
 
 
Confusion 
 
 
Seizures. 

502 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER DRUGS 
 
Amantadine is structurally similar to remantadine, crosses the blood-brain 
barrier; does not metabolized in the body; has antiparkinsonian action; displays 
side-effects associated with CNS; should be employed cautiously in patients with 
psychiatric problems, epilepsy, cerebral atherosclerosis, renal failure, pregnancy. 
 
Zanamivir (Relenza) is potent and highly selective inhibitor of neuraminidase, 
the surface enzyme of the influenza virus which releases viral particles from the 
infected cell and speeds up their penetration through the mucosal barrier to other 
respiratory cells. It is administered by oral inhalation 2 times a day, has low bioavail-
ability, is precipitated in the airways at high concentrations, is excreted unchanged by 
the kidneys for 24 hrs. Zanamivir acts in the extracellular space, reducing the 
reproduction of influenza virus, is used for the treatment and prevention of influenza 
type A and B, can cause bronchospasm, skin rash, allergic reactions as side effects. 
 
Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) is a competitive inhibitor of influenza's neuraminidase and 
prevents new viral particles from being released. It is taken orally, has bioavail-ability 
over 80% and half-life about 1-3 hrs (for its active metabolite T1/2=6–10 hrs), is 
excreted with urine as the active metabolite. The drug is used to treat and prevent 
influenza A and influenza B, it is recommended in people who are at high risk of 
complications within 48 hrs of first symptoms of infection. It may cause such side 
effects as nausea, vomiting. headache, psychiatric events, seizures, confusion, heart 
arhythmia, hepatitis and elevated liver enzymes, rash, allergic reactions, aggravation of 
diabetes, haemorrhagic colitis and Stevens–Johnson syndrome. 
 
PREPARATIONS FOR TREATMENT OF HERPES AND 
CYTOMEGALOVIRUS INFECTION 
 
ACYCLOVIR 
 
It is a synthetic purine nucleoside analog (acycloguanosine) (fig. 32.5). 

Chapter 32.
 
ANTISPIROCHETAL DRUGS. ANTIMYCOBACTERIAL DRUGS. ANTIVIRAL AGENTS
 
503 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 32.5. Structural resemblance between acyclovir and guanine-containing nucleotide 
(http://www.picsearch.com). 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, IV, or topically 
 
 
is widely distributed through the body 
 
 
penetrates into CNS 
 
 
is partially metabolized and excreted with urine. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Aciclovir transforms into triphosphate, interferes with the viral DNA 
polymerase and inhibits the viral DNA replication (fig. 32.6) 
 
It is also incorporated into DNA and leads to premature chain termination 
 
 
Acyclovir inhibits only actively replicating viruses. 

504 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Phosphate 
 
Host cell 
 
enzyme 
 
thymidine 
 
kinase 
 
Incorporated into DNA 
Guanine 
DNA polymerase 
 
nucleotide 
 
 
A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B 
 
 
 
Phosphate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acyclovir 
 
 
 
 
Viral 
 
enzyme 
 
thymidine 
 
kinase 
DNA polymerase 
 
blocked by false 
 
nucleotide. Assembly 
 
False nucleotide 
of DNA stops. 
 
(acyclovir triphosphate) 
 
Fig.32.6. Mechanism of acyclovir’s action: A – synthesis of normal viral DNA guanine 
nucleotide; B – synthesis of false viral DNA nucleotide with acyclovir (adapted from 
http://www.picsearch.com). 
 
Spectrum of action 
 
Herpes simplex virus types І and ІІ, varicella-zoster virus, Epstein-Barr virus, 
cytomegalovirus. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Primary mucocutaneous herpes infection 
 
 
Recurrent mucocutaneous herpes infection 
 
 
Herpes genitalis 
 
 
Herpes simplex encephalitis 
 
 
Prophylaxis of herpes infection before and after tissue transplantation (in 
seropositive patients). 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Local discomfort, itch (after the topical application) 
 
 
Nausea, vomiting 
 
 
Headache, encephalopathy (after IV administration) 
 
 
Nephrotoxicity. 

Chapter 32. 
ANTISPIROCHETAL DRUGS. ANTIMYCOBACTERIAL DRUGS. ANTIVIRAL 
AGENTS 505 
 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Gancyclovir is a nucleoside analogue, blocks DNA-polymerase of cytomegalo-
virus, is used for the treatment of cytomegalic retinitis in immune suppressed patients. 
 
Famcyclovir is an acyclic analogue of deoxyguanosine, is only used for the 
treatment of acute herpes zoster. 
Valacyclovir is a prodrug converted to the active drug aciclovir via hepatic 
first-pass metabolism, has greater bioavailability than aciclovir. The drug is 
predominantly active against Herpes simlex virus, and to a lesser extent Varicella 
zoster virus, is only of limited efficacy against Epstein-Barr virus and 
Cytomegalovirus (however, valacyclovir has recently been shown to eliminate the 
presence of the Epstein-Barr virus in subjects afflicted with acute mononucleosis), 
can prevent the establishment of viral latency. 
 
Vidarabine (ara-A) is adenine arabinoside, is one of the most effective nucle-
oside analogues, is the least toxic, is used for the treatment of herpes infection and 
herpes zoster. 
 
PREPARATIONS FOR TREATMENT OF VIRAL HEPATITIS 
 
RIBAVIRIN 
 
Ribavirin is an antiviral medication administered orally. is a prodrug. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
It is a guanosine analogue used to stop viral RNA synthesis and viral 
mRNA capping, thus, it is a nucleoside inhibitor. For the RNA viruses, 
when ribavirin is incorporated into RNA, as a base analogue of either 
adenine or guanine, it pairs equally well with either uracil or cytosine, 
inducing muta-tions in RNA-dependent replication in RNA viruses. Such 
hypermutation can be lethal to RNA viruses. 
 
 
For DNA viruses, ribavirin 5'-monophosphate inhibits cellular inosine 
monophosphate dehydrogenase, thereby depleting intracellular pools of 
GTP, but the mechanism of ribavirin action on DNA viruses stays unclear. 
 
Indications 
 
 
Ribavirin is used primarily to treat hepatitis C and viral hemorrhagic fevers. 
For hepatitis C ribavirin is used in combination with pegylated interferon-α. 
 
 
It is the only known treatment for a variety of viral hemorrhagic fevers, 
including Lassa fever, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, Venezuelan 
hemorrhagic fever, and Hantavirus infection. 

 
It can be used in the combined treatment of rabies. 
 
Side effects 
 
 Feeling tired, headache, nausea, fever, muscle pains, and an irritable mood 
 
 Serious side effects include red blood cell breakdown, liver problems, and 
allergic reactions. 
 Use during pregnancy results in harm to the embrio and fetus. Effective 
birth control is recommended for both males and females for 7 months after use. 
 
PREPARATIONS FOR TREATMENT OF HIV INFECTION 
 
ZIDOVUDINE (AZT) 
 
It is a nucleoside analogue (fig. 32.7). 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally 
 
 
has bioavailability of 60% 
 
 
is widely distributed through the body 
 
 
penetrates CNS 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver 
 
 
is excreted with urine in the form of metabolites 
 
 
has a half-life of 1-3 hrs. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
AZT is a nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI). Its mechanism of 
action includes: 
 
 
the phosphorilation of AZT by host cell kinases 
 
 
the formation of nucleotide analog AZT-triphosphate 
 
 
AZT-triphosphate incorporation into the growth chain of the viral DNA 
by the reverse transcriptase 
 
the immature chain termination and inhibition of viral replication (fig. 32.7). 
 
Spectrum of action 
 
HIV-1, HIV-2. 
 
Indications 
 
 
AIDS 
 
 
The prophylaxis of HIV infection through accidental needle sticks 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 32.7. Chemical structure and mechanism of action of NRTI 
and HIV protease inhibitors (by H.Lüllmann, 2000). 

508 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
The prevention of vertical HIV transmission from the mother to the neonate. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
Anemia, neutropenia 
 
 
GI distress 
 
 
Headache, agitation, insomnia 
 
 
Myalgia 
 
 
Hepatitis and cholestasis. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER NRTI 
 
Didanosine is used for AZT-resistant HIV-infection. 
 
Zalcitabine is used in a combination with AZT or as monotherapy in patients 
who can not tolerate AZT. 
 
HIV PROTEASE INHIBITORS 
 
Saquinavir, ritonavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, amporenavir belong to this group. 
Protease inhibitors act in the stage of late protein synthesis (fig.32.7). At this stage, 
HIV-specific protease cleaves biochemically inert polypeptides to produce the final 
structural and functional proteins of virus. They are used in a combination with AZT, 
reduce opportunist infections and prolonge the lives of patients. 
 
AGENTS OF WIDE ANTIVIRAL SPECTRUM OF ACTION 
 
INTERFERONS 
 
They are glycoproteins produced by leukocytes (INF-α), fibroblasts (INF- β) 
and immune cells (INF-γ). Nowdays they are synthesized by recombinant DNA 
technology. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
Interferons interact with receptors on host cell membrane and induce the 
formation of protein kinase that leads to phosphorilation and blockage of 
peptide chain initiation 
 
 
They alsoinduce phosphodiesterase activation that leads to degradation of 
terminal nucleotides of tRNA. 
 
Spectrum of action 

Chapter 32.
 
ANTISPIROCHETAL DRUGS. ANTIMYCOBACTERIAL DRUGS. ANTIVIRAL AGENTS
 
509 
 
 
Interferons have wide antiviral spectrum of action. They also have anti-
cancer, anti-toxic, and immune stimulating properties. 
 
Indications 
 
 
INF-α is used to treat viral hepatitis A and B, Kaposi’s sarcoma, papillo-
matosis, hairy cell leukemia. 
 
INF- β is applied for treatment of multiple sclerosis. 
 
 
INF-γ is used for chronic granulomatous disease. 
 
Side effects 
 
 Fever 
 
 Lethargy 
 
 Bone marrow suppression 
 
 Heart failure 
 
 Hypersensitivity. 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. Bijochinolum: 
 
 
Is a synthetic anti-tubercular drug 
 
 
Is the basis antibiotic for treatment of syphilis 
 
 
Is the bismuth preparation for the treatment of syphilis 
 
 
Is administered orally 
 
 
Is used only in syphylis. 
 
№2. Antiviral agents that inhibit viral nucleic acid synthesis do not include: 
 
 
Remantadine 
 
 
Acyclovir 
 
 
Gancyclovir 
 
 
Famcyclovir 
 
 
Vidarabine. 
 
№3. Isoniazid: 
 
 
Is highly effective against tuberculosis 
 
 
Inhibits the synthesis of mycolic acids 
 
 
Is the 2nd line preparation for the treatment of tuberculosis 
 
 
Does not act on intracellular mycobacteria 

510 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
E.  Is less neurotoxic if given together with pyridoxine. 
 
№4. Zidovudine has such properties as: 
 
 
Inhibits HIV reverse transcriptase 
 
 
Is taken orally 
 
 
Can be used for the treatment of herpes and cytomegalovirus infection 
 
 
Significantly reduces mortality and morbility from AIDS 
 
 
Is used in a combination with HIV protease inhibitors. 
 
№5. A patient came to a doctor with complaints of urine and lacrimal liquid 
painted red. It is known from the patient’s anamnesis, that he was 
treated for pulmonary tuberculosis. What anti-tubercular drug became 
the cause of such complications? 
 
 
Isoniazid 
 
 
Rifampin 
 
 
Ethionamide 
 
 
Streptomycin sulfate 
 
 
Ethambutol. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – C; № 2 – A; № 3 – A, B, E; № 4 – A, B, D, E; № 5 – B. 

 
 
Chapter 
33 ANTIPROTOZOAL 
DRUGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MALARIA AND CONTROL STRATEGY FOR IT 
 
Malaria is an acute infectious disease caused by the parasites called plasmo-
dia. There are 4 species of plasmodia: Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium vivax, 
Plasmodium malariae, Plasmodium ovale. Plasmodium falciparum is the most 
dangerous species causing acute disease characterized by high fever, orthostatic 
hypotension, and massive hemolysis. This infection can cause capillary 
obstruction and death. 
 
The life cycle of parasite consists of sexual and asexual stages (fig.33.1). The 
1st stage takes place in female anopheles mosquito. At this stage, parasite exists as 
gametocyte. The 2nd one develops in the human body. Here it may reside in the 
liver (pre-erythrocytic schizogoni) and in erythrocytes (erythrocytic shizogoni). 
 
The control of this dreaded menace would therefore involve three living be-
ings: Man (The host), Plasmodia (The agent), and Anopheles mosquito (The 
vec-tor) (table 33.1) The control of malaria is a complex chain of measures that 
often complement one another. 
 
The control strategy for malaria, concerning the human, includes an early di-
agnosis and treatment: 
 
 
Presumptive treatment. Tests for malarial parasite should be done in all 
cases of fever, and presumptive treatment with the first full dose of 
chloro-quine should be administered. Chloroquine is highly effective as 
schizonti-cidal drug against all species of malaria and is also 
gametocytocidal against all except Plasmodium falciparum. Thus, by 
administering chloroquine to all cases of fever, it is possible to sterilize 
the gametocytes and thus prevent the spread to mosquitoes. 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
Table 33.1. Control strategy for malaria 
 
 
HUMAN (Host) 
PARASITE (Agent) 
MOSQUITO (Vector) 
Kill the asexual forms 
Prevent the progression of 
Treat the affected 
disease 
Prevent breeding 
Kill the sexual forms 
Prevent entry 
Protect the unaffected 
Prevent the spread to mos- 
Prevent bites 
quitoes 
Ensure full treatment 
Problem: Compliance 
Problem: Drug resistance 
Problems: Resistance to 
insecticides; compliance 
 
 
 
Malaria 
 
Transmission 
 
Cycle 
 
1st 
 
Vector 
 
Initial 
 
human 
 
host 
 
Liver 
 
infection Blood 
infection 
 
In utero 
transmission 
 
 
 
Plasmodium 
sporozoites 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2nd 
 
Vector 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Next 
human 
host 
 
Fig. 33.1. Transmission cycle of malaria (http://www.picsearch.com). 

Chapter 33.  ANTIPROTOZOAL DRUGS 
513
 
 
Radical treatment. All confirmed cases of fever should be administered 
with primaquine. A single dose of primaquine must be administered in 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria to sterilize the gametocytes. A 14 days 
course of primaquine should be administered in Plasmodium vivax infec-
tion to destroy the pre-erythrocytic shizontes in the liver and thus to 
prevent relapse. 
 
 
Ensure compliance. A complete treatment should be ensured. If the patient 
vomits the drugs within an hour of ingestion, the same should be repeated. 
 
Many patients fail to complete the treatment due to either negligence, the 
lack of proper education or sometimes due to adverse effects. 
 
Personal protection: A human should be encouraged to protect himself 
(or herself) against malaria. Personal protection measures include 
protection against mosquito bites and chemoprophylaxis against malaria. 
 
 
Chemoprophylaxis: Travelers to endemic areas and high risk 
individuals living in endemic areas (pregnant, elderly, patients with organ 
failure) should start on chemoprophylaxis against malaria. This involves 
taking antimalarial drugs every week (some drugs must be taken every 
day) so as to suppress malaria. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
According to the chemical structure 
 
 4-Aminoquinolines 
 
–  Chloroquine 
 
 Quinoline-methanols 
 
–  Quinine 
 
–  Mefloquine 
 
 8-Aminoquinolines 
 
–  Primaquine 
 
 Sulfonamides and sulfone 
 
–  Sulfadoxine 
 
–  Sulfamethopyrazine 
 
–  Dapsone (pyrimethamine + sulfonamide) 
 
 Diaminopyridines 
 
–  Pyrimethamine (Chloridinum) 
 
 Biguanides 
 
–  Chloroguanide (proguanil) 
 
 Hydroxynapthoquinone 
 
–  Atavaquone 

514 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 Other preparations 
 
–  Halofantrine 
 
–  Artemisinin 
 
–  Fansidar. 
 
According to the antimalarial action 
 
 Hemato-shizonticidal agents 
 
–  Quinoline-methanols 
 
–  4-Aminoquinolines 
 
–  Sulfonamides and sulfone 
 
–  Hydroxynapthoquinone 
 
–  Diaminopyridines 
 
 Tissue-shizonticidal agents 
 
–  8-Aminoquinolines 
 
 Gameticidic agents 
 
–  4-Aminoquinolines 
 
–  8-Aminoquinolines 
 
–  Diaminopyridines. 
 
CHLOROQUINE 
 
Choroquine is the most potent antimalarial agent, 4-aminoquinoline 
derivative (fig. 33.2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 33.2. Chemical structure of chloroquine. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally and IM 

Chapter 33.  ANTIPROTOZOAL DRUGS 
515
 
 
is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral administration; concentrates 
in the erythrocytes, liver, spleen; has a very large volume of distribution 
 
 
penetrates CNS and placenta 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver: some metabolic products retain antimalarial 
activity 
 
 
is excreted with urine. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
The food vacuole is a lysosome-like organelle in which the breakdown of 
hemoglobin and the detoxification of heme occur. Chloroquine 
concentrates up to several 1000-fold in the food vacuole of the parasite. 
 
 
This accumulation may involve ion trapping following protonation, 
specific transport, and/or binding to a receptor. 
 
 
The major action of chloroquine is to inhibit the formation of hemozoin 
from the heme released by the digestion of hemoglobin (fig.33.3). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 33.3. Mechanism of action of chloroquine: CQ – chloroquine, 
 
Hb – hemoglobin, Hz – hemozoin (http://www.picsearch.com). 
 
 
The free heme then lyses membranes and leads to the parasite death. 

516 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
Chloroquine resistance is due to a decreased accumulation of chloroquine 
in the food vacuole. 
 
Spectrum of action 
 
Erythrocytic shizontes of Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium vivax (less 
ef-fective), gametocytes of Plasmodium falciparum, Entamoeba histolytica. 
The drug also has an anti-inflammatory, weak cytostatic action, suppresses 
immunity, excerts anti-arrhythmic effect in the human body. 
 
Indications 
 
 
An acute attack of malaria 
 
 
Malarial coma 
 
 
The prevention of the spread of malaria 
 
 
Individual chemoprophylaxis 
 
 
Extra-intestinal amebiasis 
 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
 
 
Discoid lupus erythematosus. 
 
Side-effects 
 
 
A gastrointestinal upset 
 
 
Headache 
 
 
Skin rash, itch 
 
 
Visual disturbances 
 
 
Depigmentation of nails beds, hair, and mucous membranes 
 
 
A quinidine-like effect in the heart. 
 
Contraindications 
 
Hepatic dysfunction, severe gastrointestinal diseases, neurological and blood 
disorders, psoriasis, porphyria. 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Quinine is an alkaloid of the bark of a cinconha tree; is administered orally, is 
widely distributed in the body, penetrates CNS, crosses placental barrier, is blood 
shizonticide; realizes its action by complexes with double-stranded DNA to prevent 
strand separation resulting in block of DNA replication and transcription of RNA; is 
used to treat an attack of Plasmodium falciparum malaria resistant to chloroquine; in 
humans, inhibits CNS, has a M-cholinomimetic action on the smooth muscles, 

Chapter 33.  ANTIPROTOZOAL DRUGS 
517
 
stimulates uterus contractions, suppresses the conduction system of the heart (a 
quinidine-like effect) and the contractility of the myocardium; may cause cinchon-
ism, a syndrome including gastrointestinal distress, headache, vertigo, blurred 
vision, tinnitus, AV block, heart incompetence; also causes hemolytic anemia 
(blackwater fever); is fetotoxic and contraindicated in pregnancy. 
 
Mefloquine is structurally relative to quinine; is administered orally, is well 
absorbed in the GI tract, concentrates in the liver and lungs, has a long half-life 
(17 days), is excreted with feces; is blood shizonticide of the unknown mechanism 
of action (fig. 33.4); is an effective single agent for suppressing and curing multi-
drug resistant forms of Plasmodium falciparum; is less toxic than quinine, but may 
cause nausea, vomiting, dizziness, disorientation, depression, ECG disturbances a 
heart arrest if is given together with anti-arrhythmics. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 33.4. Stages in the plasmodium life-cycle 
 
when antimalarial drugs act (http://www.picsearch.com). 

518 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Primaquine is a 8-aminoquinoline derivative; is administered orally, is well 
absorbed in the gut, rapidly oxidized, and excreted with urine; has the mechanism of 
action connected with an oxidative damage of parasite cell; is tissue shizonticide (fig. 
33.4); acts on pre-erythrocytic forms of Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium vivax, 
Plasmodium ovale, as well as on gametocytic forms of all four plasmodia; is used to 
eradicate liver stages of Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium ovale (in conjugation with 
blood shizonticides); is also used for the interruption of malaria transmission; is well 
tolerated, but may cause gastrointestinal disturbances, methemoglobinemia, headache, 
itch, hemolysis in patients deficit in glucose-6-phospate dehydrogenase. 
 
Sulfonamides and sulfone are blood shizonticides active mainly against 
Plasmodium falciparum. The malaria parasite synthesizes folates de novo, whereas the 
human host must obtain preformed folates and cannot synthesize folate. The in-ability 
of the parasite to utilize exogenous folates makes folate biosynthesis a good drug 
target. One of these enzymes, dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS), is inhibited by sulfa-
based drugs. Sulfadoxine and dapsone are two common antimalarials that target 
DHPS. The sulfa drugs are structural anlalogs of PABA and are converted into non-
metabolizable adducts by DHPS. This leads to a depletion of the folate pool and 
thereby reduces the amount of thymidylate available for the DNA synthesis. 
 
Pyrimethamine and proguanil are the two most common dihydrofolate 
reductase (DHFR) inhibitors used as antimalarials. Inhibiting DHFR prevents the 
formation of thymidylate and leads to the arrest in the DNA synthesis and the 
subsequent parasite death. Pyrimethamine alone is blood shizontocide and strong 
sporonticide in the mosquito’s gut, is effective against Plasmodium falciparum in 
a combination with a sulfonamide, is used against Plasmodium malariae and 
Toxoplasma gondii. It may cause deficit of the folic acid and megaloblastic 
anemia, has teratogenic action. Proguanil has similar targets of action (fig. 33.4). 
 
Fansidar is a combined antimalarial drug that contains sulfadoxine and py-
rimethamine. It violates the metabolismof folic acid in plasmodium, also is effec-tive 
against Toxoplasma gondii and Pneumocystis carinii. The drug is used for the 
treatment of malaria, especially caused by Plasmodium falciparum resistant to other 
preparations, prevention of malaria in the regions endemic to Plasmodium falciparum, 
toxoplasmosis and prophylaxis of pneumocystic pneumonia. It can cause such side 
effects as nausea, vomiting, stomatitis, hepatitis, hematologic changes (leukopenia, 
thrombocytopenia, megaloblastic anemia, agranulocytosis, purpura), lethargy, 
headache, fever, polyneuritis, pulmonary infiltrates, cough, dyspnea, skin reactions, 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis (Lyell's syndrome). 
Artemisinin and its semi-synthetic derivatives are a group of drugs used against 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria It was isolated from the plant Artemisia annua and a 
sesquiterpene lactone containing peroxide bridge. The mechanism of action appears 

Chapter 33.  ANTIPROTOZOAL DRUGS 
519
 
to involve the heme-mediated decomposition of the endoperoxide bridge to produce 
carbon-centred free radicals. The involvement of heme explains why the drug is 
selectively toxic to malaria parasites. The World Health Organisation has recom-
mended artemisinin combination therapies be the first-line therapy for Plasmodium 
falciparum malaria worldwide. Combinations are effective because the artemisinin 
component kills the majority of parasites at the start of the treatment, while the more 
slowly eliminated partner drug clears the remaining parasites Artemisinin is not used 
for malaria prophylaxis because of short half-life. The drug is potent anthelmintic ac-
tive against many trematodes including different species of Schistosoma, Clonorchis 
sinensis, Fasciola hepatica, and Opisthorchis viverrini. Artemisinin is well tolerated 
and displays the side effects which are similar to the symptoms of malaria: nausea, 
vomiting, anorexia, and dizziness 
 
DRUGS FOR TREATMENT OF AMEBIASIS 
 
AMEBIASIS 
 
Amebiasis is a disease caused by a one-celled parasite called Entamoeba his-
tolytica. It is more common in people who live in tropical areas with poor sanitary 
conditions. In European countries and the USA amebiasis is most often found in 
travellers to and immigrants from these areas, as well as in people who live in 
insti-tutions with poor sanitary conditions. 
 
Only about 10% to 20% of people who are infected with Entamoeba 
histolytica become sick from the infection. The symptoms often are quite mild and 
can include loose stools, stomach pain, and stomach cramping. Amebic dysentery 
is a severe form of amebiasis associated with stomach pain, bloody stools, and 
fever. Rarely, Entamoeba histolytica invades the liver and forms an abscess. Even 
less commonly, it spreads to other parts of the body, such as the lungs or brain. 
 
Life cycle of Entamoeba histolytica includes ingestion of cysts, the formation 
of trophozoites, the penetration of intestinal wall, the multiplication of 
trophozoites within the colon wall, excretion of cysts with feces. If amoebas enter 
the blood and travel to another organs, they cause systemic invasion. 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 Mixed amebicides (for all localizations) 
 
–  Metronidazole 
 
 Tissue amebicides 
 
–  Metronidazole 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
–  Tinidazole 
 
–  Emetine hydrochloride 
 
–  Chloroquine 
 
 Luminal amebicides 
 
–  Iodoquinol 
 
–  Tetracyclines 
 
–  Diloxanide furoate 
 
–  Quiniodochlor. 
 
METRONIDAZOLE 
 
It is a nitroimidazole derivative (fig. 33.5). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 33.5. Chemical structure of metronidazole. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is administered orally, IV, rectally, vaginally, applied topically as gel or 
ointment 
 
is well absorbed in the gut 
 
 
binds to plasma proteins (about 10% of a drug) 
 
 
has the volume of distribution of 70-95% of body mass 
 
 
penetrates CNS and placenta; develops therapeutic levels in vaghinal and 
semenal fluids, saliva, breast milk, cerebro-spinal fluid 
 
concentrates in the liver 
 
 
is metabolized in the liver (30-60%), has entero-hepatic circulation, is 
excreted with bile to the intestine and is absorbed again, produces a high 
concentration in the bile 
 
 
is the inhibitor of liver enzymes 
 
 
is excreted with urine, bile, and feces 
 
 
has a half-life of 8-10 hrs, completely leaves the body during 2-3 days. 

Chapter 33.  ANTIPROTOZOAL DRUGS 
521
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
The drug is activated by a reduction of the nitro group to an anion radical 
 
(fig. 33.6) 
 
 
 
 
METRONIDAZOLE 
 
Ferrodoxin 
 
reduced 
 
 
Ferrodoxin 
 
oxidized 
 
Metabolites 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DNA 
DNA 
 
fragmented 
 
Fig. 33.6. Mechanism of action of metronidazole. 
 
 
In the case of metronidazole, reduced ferredoxin appears to be the 
primary electron donor responsible for its reduction. 
 
The anion radical is highly reactive and forms adjunctions with proteins and 
DNA leading to a loss of the function. In particular, the reactions with 
 
DNA result in the strand breakage and inhibition of replication and will 
lead to the cell death. 
 
There is a good correlation between the presence of the pyruvate-
ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PFOR) and sensitivity to metronidazole. All 
three of the protozoa (Giaridia, Entamoeba, and Trichomonas) affected 
by metroni-dazole lack mitochondria and have PFOR similar to that 
found in many anaerobic bacteria. Aerobic microbes use other electron 
transport systems and are not sensitive to metronidazole. 

522 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Spectrum of action 
 
Protozoa (Giardia lamblia, Entamoeba histolytica, Trichomonas vaginalis, 
Leishmania), anaerobic cocci, anaerobic Gram (+) and Gram (-) bacilli (Bacteroides spp., 
Eubacterium spp., Fusobacterium spp., Clostridium spp., Helicobacter pylori, etc). 
 
Indications 
 
 
Amebiasis 
 
 
Trichomoniasis 
 
 
Giardiasis 
 
 
Cutaneous leishmaniasis 
 
 
Sepsis, peritonitis, meningitis, brain abscess caused by sensitive mi-
crobes (IV) 
 
Respiratory infections, infections of the intestine and urinary pathways 
caused by sensitive microbes 
 
Pseudomembranous colitis 
 
 
Prophylaxis of anaerobic infection before abdominal surgery 
 
 
Peptic ulcer associated with Helicobacter pylori 
 
 
Infections of the skin (perioral dermatitis) and soft tissues (topically) 
 
 
Paradontitis, ulcerative stomatitis (topically). 
 
Side-effects 
Contraindications 
1. A loss of appetite 
1. Hemopoiesis disturbances 
2. An unpleasant taste in the mouth 
2. Organic lesions of CNS 
3. Nausea, vomiting 
3. Pregnancy 
4. Diarrhea 
4. Lactation 
5. Headache, reversible polyneuropathy 
5. Should not be used togeth- 
6. Skin rash, itch 
er with alcohol drinks due 
7. Leukopenia 
to disulfiram-like reaction. 
 
Red-brown discoloration of urine 
 
 
Changes in pharmacokinetics of some other 
drugs (e.g.; ethyl alcohol, lithium salts). 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
Tinidazole is a nitroimidazole derivative; similar to metronidazole; is only 
taken orally; is not used in leishmaniasis. 

Chapter 33.  ANTIPROTOZOAL DRUGS 
523
 
Chloroquine is an antimalarial preparation with amebicidic properties. It is a 
systemic amebicide; is used in a conjugation with metronidazole and diloxanide to 
treat and prevent amebic liver abscesses. 
 
Emetine is an alkaloid from ipecacuanna; is administered IM, SC, concentrates in 
the liver, is metabolized slowly, can accumulate, has a half-life of 5 days; inhibits pro-
tein synthesis at the stage of elongaion; is the alternative drug in the treatment of tissue 
amebiasais; is toxic and causes nausea, vomiting, cardiotoxicity, weakness, dizziness. 
Diloxanide furoate is a luminal amebicide; is used to treat intestinal 
amebiasis; is well tolerated, but may cause flatulence, dry mouth, itch, urticaria; is 
contraindicated to pregnant women and children younger than 2 years of age. 
 
DRUGS FOR TREATMENT OF TRICHOMONIASIS 
 
Trichomoniasis is the most common curable sexually transmitted disease in 
young women. As estimated, 7.4 million new cases occur each year in women and 
men. Trichomoniasis is caused by the single-celled protozoan parasite, 
Trichomonas vaginalis. The vagina is the most common site of infection in 
women, and the urethra (urine canal) is the most common site of infection in men. 
 
Trichomoniasis can usually be cured with nitroimidazole derivatives (metroni-
dazole, tinidazole or ornidazole) and nitrofuran derivatives (furozolidone). These 
drugs are described in Chapter 30 and as amebicides in presented Chapter. 
 
DRUGS FOR TREATMENT OF GIARDIASIS 
 
Giardiasis is an intestinal illness caused by infection with the parasite 
Giardia lamblia which lives in contaminated water. Although the illness most 
frequently occurs in developing countries, giardiasis is also one of the most 
common causes of waterborne illness in the United States. Giardia lamblia 
parasites are found in the feces of infected people. Two-thirds of persons infected 
with the organism do not have any symptoms. When symptoms occur, they 
typically start one to three weeks after exposure and include a sudden onset of 
watery diarrhea, abdominal cramping, bloating, nausea, gas. 
 
Although most people will recover from giardiasis without treatment, 
medica-tions, such as metronidazole, quinacrine hydrochloride (Mepacrine) or 
furazolidone (furoxone), are used to treat giardiasis. 
 
Peculiarities of preparations 
 
Quinacrine is an acridine derivative that is effective in the treatment of giardiasis, 
malaria, leishmaniasis, and tapeworm invasion; is taken orally, concentrates in the liver, 

524 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
skin, brain tissue, accumulates; binds to membrane phospholipids, blocks phospholipase 
A2, disturbs functions of DNA, also binds to acetylcholine receptor; may cause diz-ziness, 
headache, vomiting, liver lesions, yellow pigmentation of the skin, psychosis. 
 
Metronidazole and furazolidone are described in detail as amebicides and 
chemotherapeutics of different chemical structure. 
 
DRUGS FOR TREATMENT OF TOXOPLASMOSIS 
 
Toxoplasmosis is caused by a microscopic parasite Toxoplasma gondii that 
can live inside the cells of humans and animals, especially cats and farm animals. 
Toxoplasmosis passes from animals to humans, sometimes without causing any 
symptoms. When kids have symptoms, they vary depending on the child’s age and 
the immune system’s response to the infection. 
 
Toxoplasmosis infections in people fall into three basic patterns: 
 
 congenital toxoplasmosis, in which a child becomes infected before birth; 2) 
toxo-plasmosis in otherwise healthy kids (with the same symptoms a pregnant 
woman may have); 3) toxoplasmosis in kids with weakened immune systems. 
 
Toxoplasmosis is treated with pyrimethamine which is described as an 
antima-larial agent and its combinations with sulfonamides (sulfadiasine). 
 
 
DRUGS FOR TREATMENT OF LEISHMANIASIS 
 
LEISHMANIASIS 
 
Leishmaniasis is a parasitic disease that is found in the tropics, subtropics, 
and southern Europe. It is caused by infection with Leishmania parasites which are 
spread by the bite of infected sand flies. There are several different forms of 
leishmaniasis in people. The most common forms are cutaneous leishmaniasis 
which causes skin sores, and visceral leishmaniasis which affects some of the 
internal organs of the body (e. g. the spleen, liver, and bone marrow). 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 The drugs for the treatment of cutaneous leishmaniasis 
 
–  Quinacrine 
 
–  Metronidazole 
 
–  Monomycine 
 
–  Amphotericin B 

Chapter 33.  ANTIPROTOZOAL DRUGS 
525
 
 The drugs for the treatment of visceral leishmaniasis 
 
–  Sodium stibogluconate 
 
–  Pentamidine. 
 
SODIUM STIBOGLUCONATE 
 
 
is the compound of pentavalent antimony 
 
 
is administered IV; has minimal metabolism; is excreted with urine 
 
 
is not active in vitro 
 
 
has an unclear mechanism of action: probably it is connected with the 
inhibi-tion of glycolysis and blockade of SH-groups in the parasite 
 
is used in visceral leishmaniasis as a preparation of choice 
 
 
may cause asthenia, headache, anemia, hepatitis. 
 
Some other preparations for the treatment of leishmaniasis (quinacrine, 
metronidazole, amphotericin B) are presented in other parts of this Chapter 
and in Chapter 30. 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. The blood shizonticides are all the drugs, except: 
 
 
Chloroquine 
 
 
Primaquine 
 
 
Quinine 
 
 
Pyrimethamine 
 
 
Mefloquine. 
 
№2. The mechanism of the action of chloroquine is connected with: 
 
 
The conversion of the nitro-group into the toxic anion radical 
 
 
Blockade of SH-groups 
 
 
Prevention of hemoglobin digestion 
 
 
Disturbances in DNA reduplication 
 
 
Folate antagonism. 
 
№3. The indications for the use of metronidazole are: 
 
 
All forms of malaria 
 
 
All forms of amebiasis 
 
 
Giardiasis 
 
 
Trichomoniasis 

526 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
E.  Visceral leishmaniasis 
 
№4. The correct statements concerning antiprotozoals are: 
 
 
Quinine is used for the radical cure of malaria 
 
 
Chloroquine is used for malaria and amebiasis 
 
 
Metronidazole may cause disulfiram-like adverse reaction 
 
 
Sodium stibogluconate is antimony compound for leishmaniasis 
 
 
Sodium stibogluconate is a folate antagonist for toxoplasmosis. 
 
№5. A patient with an acute attack of malaria was presctibed with an erythrocytic 
shizonticidal fast acting drug. In addition to antimalaial effect, this drug has 
anti-inflammatory properties and is used in the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis and lupus erythematosus. This preparation is: 
 
 
Pyrimethamine 
 
 
Chloroquine 
 
 
Quinine 
 
 
Metronidazole 
 
 
Emetine. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – B; № 2 – C; № 3 – B, C, D; № 4 – B, C, D; № 5 – B. 

Chapter 33.  ANTIPROTOZOAL DRUGS 
527
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 ANTIHELMINTHIC 
DRUGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HELMINTHIASIS AND ITS CONTROL 
 
Helminthic infection (helminthiasis) is caused by pathogenic worms and 
may be localized in the alimentary tract or in other tissues. There are several main 
spe-cies of parasitic worms causing human helminthic infections. They are 
tapeworms (cestodes): Taenia saginata, Taenia solium, Hymenolepis nana, and 
Echionococcus species; roundworms (nematodes): Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Enterobius vermicularis, Ancilostoma duodenale, Necator americanus, Trichinella 
spiralis; 
trematodes: 
Schistosoma 
mansoni, 
Schistosoma 
haematobium. 
Helminthiases are divided into groups by their etiology (fig. 34.1). 
 
 
HELMINTHIASES 
 
Nematodoses 
 
Cestodoses 
 
Trematodoses 
 
Fig. 34.1. Main classes of helminthiases. 

Intestinal helminthiasis is an infestation with one or more intestinal parasitic 
worms. It is more often than tissue helminthiasis. Infected people excrete helminth 
eggs in their feces which then contaminate the soil in areas with inadequate sanitation. 
Other people can then be infected by ingesting eggs or larvae in contaminated food, or 
through the penetration of the skin by infective larvae in the soil (hookworms). 
 
Infestation can cause morbidity, and sometimes death, by compromising 
nutritional status, affecting cognitive processes, inducing tissue reactions, such as 
granuloma, and provoking intestinal obstruction or rectal prolapse. 
 
Control of helminthiasis is based: 
 
 
on drug treatment 
 
 
improved sanitation 
 
 
health education. 
 
ANTIHELMINTHICS 
 
Antihelminthics are drugs that expel parasitic worms (helminths) from the 
body by either stunning or killing them. They may also be called vermifuges 
(stunning) or vermicides (killing). 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 Drugs for treatment of nematodoses 
a. For intestinal nematodoses 
 
– Pyrantel pamoate 
 
– Piperazine adipinate 
 
– Levamisole 
 
b. For extraintestinal nematodoses 
 
– Diethylcarbamazine 
 
– Ivermectin 
 
 Drugs for treatment of cestodoses 
 
 For intestinal cestodoses 
 
– Niclosamide (Phenasal) 
 
 For extraintestinal cestodoses 
 
– Albendazole 
 
 Drugs for treatment of trematodoses 
 
 For intestinal trematodoses 
 
– Perchloroethylene 
 
 For extraintestinal trematodoses 
 
– Praziquantel 
 
– Chloxyl 
 
 Drugs of wide spectrum of action 

Chapter 34.  ANTIHELMINTHIC DRUGS 
529
 
– Praziquantel. 
 
– Albendazole 
 
– Mebendazole 
 
MEBENDAZOLE 
 
Mebendazole is a benzoimidazole derivative (fig. 34.2). 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
 
is taken orally 
 
 
is poorly absorbed in the gut (10%); absorption is increased in the 
presence of fatty meals 
 
is rapidly metabolized 
 
 
is excreted with urine and bile within 24-48 hrs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 34.2. Chemical structure of mebendazole. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
It inhibits the polymerization of helminth tubulin that leads to inhibiting 
the synthesis of microtubules in parasitic worms, and destroying extant 
cytoplasmic microtubules in their intestinal cells. 
 
 
Thus, the drug interferes with microtubule-dependent functions, such as a 
glucose uptake. 
 
 
The effect takes time to develop and the worms may not be expelled for 
several days. 
 
 
The cure rates are 60-100% with most parasites. 
 
Spectrum of action 

530 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Pinworm (Enterobius vermicularis), roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides), 
guinea worm (Dracunculus medinensis) , Trichinella spiralis , hookworm 
(Ancilostoma duodenale, Necator americanus), whipworm (Trichuris trichiura). 
 
Indications 
 
 
Infection caused by pinworm 
 
 
Infection caused by roundworm 
 
 
Infection caused by guinea worm 
 
 
Trichiniasis 
 
 
Infection caused by hookworm 
 
 
Infection caused by whipworm. 
 
Is given as a single dose for threadworm, and twice daily for 3 days for hook-
worm and roundworm infestations. 
 
Side-effects 
 
Gastrointestinal disturbances , elevated liver enzymes, low white blood cell 
count, low platelet count, and hair loss. 
 
Contraindications 
 
Should not be given to pregnant women and children under 2 years old. 
 
 
PECULIARITIES OF OTHER PREPARATIONS 
 
ALBENDAZOLE 
 
 
is a broad-spectrum antihelminthic agent of the benzimidazole type. 
 
 
It is taken orally. Oral absorption of albendazole is small and depends on 
gastric pH and increases with a fatty meal. To target intestinal parasites, 
albendazole is taken on an empty stomach. For systemic parasites, it acts 
as a prodrug, while albendazole sulfoxide (active metabolite) reaches 
systemic circulation and acts as the real antihelminthic. The metabolites 
mostly excreted in the bile. 
 
 
causes degenerative alterations in the intestinal cells of the worm by binding to β-
tubulin, thus inhibiting its polymerization or assembly into microtu-bules. The 
drug leads to impaired uptake of glucose by parasites, and depletes their glycogen 
stores. It prevents the formation of spindle fibers needed for cell division, which 
in turn blocks egg production and development. Cell 

Chapter 34.  ANTIHELMINTHIC DRUGS 
531
 
motility, cell shape, and intracellular transport are also disrupted. At 
higher concentrations, it inhibits ATP production by the Krebs cycle due 
to which the parasite is immobilized and eventually dies. 
 
 
is an effective treatment for fasciolosis, cestodes (adult beef tapeworms 
(Taenia saginata), pork tapeworms (Taenia solium); cysticercosis caused by 
the larval form of the pork tapeworm; echinococcosis of the liver, lung, and 
peritoneum (caused by the dog tapeworm, Echinococcus granulosus) or of 
the alveoli (caused by Echinococcus multilocularis); ascariasis,; baylisasca-
riasis caused by the raccoon roundworm; enterobiasis (pinworm infection); 
filariasis; lymphatic filariasis (elephantiasis) caused by Wuchereria ban-crofti 
or Brugia malayi; gnathostomiasis; hookworm infections, including 
cutaneous larva migrans caused by hookworms in the Ancylostoma genus; 
intestinal capillariasis, strongyloidiasis, toxocariasis (visceral larva migrans), 
trichinosis, trichostrongyliasis, trichuriasis (whipworm infection), giardiasis; 
microsporidiosis; granulomatous amoebic encephalitis. 
 
 
side effects are headache and abnormal liver function with elevation of liver 
enzymes; abdominal pain, nausea or vomiting, bone marrow suppression 
which usually improves on stopping the medication, dizziness or vertigo, 
increased intracranial pressure, meningeal signs, hair loss, and fever. 
 
PIPERAZINE 
 
 
is taken orally, has poor absorption in the gut, is partly metabolized and 
excreted with urine 
 
acts as GABA on GABA-gated chloride channels in nematode muscles, 
causes paralysis of worms which are expelled alive by normal intestinal 
peristaltic movements 
 
is effective against Ascaris lumbricoides and Enterobius vermicularis 
 
 
is used in a single dose to treat roundworm and in the form of 7-days 
course to treat threadworm 
 
may cause gastrointestinal disturbances, urticaria, spasm of bronchi, 
rarely dizziness, paraesthesias, vertigo, incoordination 
 
is contraindicated in pregnancy, renal and hepatic diseases. 
 
LEVAMISOLE 
 
 
is taken by mouth, is quickly absorbed and widely distributed in the 
body, crosses the blood-brain barrier, is metabolized in the liver and 
excreted with urine, has a half-life of 4 hrs 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
has a nicotine-like action, blocks neuromuscular transmission in 
nematodes, thus causes paralysis of worms and their expelling 
 
 
is effective against Ascaris lumbricoides and less active against other 
nematodes 
 
 
is used to treat roundworm (a single-dose therapy) 
 
 
stimulates immunity in the humans, especially T-dependent processes 
and phagocytosis, that’s why is used in the complex treatment of 
collagenoses, chronic non-specific diseases of the lungs 
 
if a single-dose therapy is used, side-effects are few and soon subside; 
when the drug is used as an immune stimulant, it may cause fever, an 
influenza-like syndrome, leukopenia. 
 
PYRANTEL 
 
 
is taken orally, is poorly absorbed and acts in the gut 
 
 
is the depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent causing the paralysis of 
nematode musculature and their expelling from the intestine 
 
 
is effective against Ascaris lumbricoides, Enterobius vermicularis, 
Ancilostoma duodenale, Necator americanus 
 
is used to treat infections caused by roundworms, pinworms, and hookworms 
 
 
may cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhea. 
 
IVERMECTIN 
 
 
is safe and highly effective antihelminthic of a broad spectrum of action 
 
 
is a semisynthetic agent obtained from actinomycete organism 
 
 
is given orally; has a half-life of 11 hrs 
 
 
acts probably by opening glutamate-gated chloride channels and 
increasing the CL- influx, by the stimulation of N-cholinoreceptors and 
motor paralysis of worms, or by binding to GABA-receptors 
 
is effective against Strongiloides stercolaris, Wuchereria bancrofti. 
Onchocerca volvulus, roundworms, whipworms 
 
is the first choice of the drug for filarial infection, onchocerciasis (river 
blindness), infestation by Wuchereria bancrofti caused elephantiasis 
 
is well tolerated, but may cause skin rash, fever, headache, pain in 
muscles and joints. 
 
NICLOSAMIDE 
 
 
is taken orally 

Chapter 34.  ANTIHELMINTHIC DRUGS 
533
 
 
causes paralysis of muscles of tapeworms and damages their covering tunic, 
thus provides the damage of tapeworms by intestinal enzymes, their separa-
tion from the intestinal wall and expelling of damaged parasites 
 
 
is effective against Taenia saginata, Taenia solium, Hymenolepis nana 
 
 
is used to treat infestations by tapeworms: for Taenia solium the drug is 
given in a single dose after a light meal followed by a purgative 2 hrs 
later for the evacuation of ova and prevention of cysticercosis 
 
 
may cause nausea and vomiting. 
 
PRAZIQUANTEL 
 
 
is a highly effective broad-spectrum antihelmintic 
 
 
is administered orally, is well absorbed, is quickly metabolized and 
excreted with urine, has a half-life of 1-1,5 hrs 
 
 
binds to protein kinase C, increases the Ca++ influx into the muscular cells 
of parasites, thus produces a rapid and prolonged contracture of 
musculature, paralysis, and death of the worm; also disrupts the tegu-
ments of the parasite and make it more susceptible to the host’s normal 
immune responses 
 
is effective against blood flukes (Schistosoma mansoni, Schistosoma 
haema-tobium, Schistosoma japonicum), Dracunculus medinensis, 
Echinococcus granulosus, larva of Taenia solium 
 
 
is used to treat schistosomiasis, cysticercosis, hydated disease; is 
commonly used in national disease control programmes 
 
 
has minimal side-effects, may be used in pregnant and lactating women. 
 
DIETHYLCARBAMAZINE 
 
 
is a piperazine derivative 
 
 
is administered orally, is widely distributed in the body, is partly 
metabolized and excreted with urine, stays in the organism during 48 hrs 
 
 
is active in filarial infections, rapidly removes microfilariae from the blood 
circulation and has a limited effect on the adult worms in the lymphatics 
 
is used to treat filarial infections, whipoworm, wisceral larva migrans 
 
 
may cause gastrointestinal disturbances, arthralgias, headache, weakness, 
toxic and allergic reactions due to dying filariae. 
 
ANTIHELMINTHICS 

534 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
FROM MEDICINAL PLANTS 
 
There are many medicinal plants with antihelminthic properties which are 
used in traditional and folk medicine in different countries. Examples of naturally 
occur-ring anthelmintics include: Tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum), black walnut 
(Juglans nigra), wormwood (Arthemisia absynthium, Arthemisia cina), clove 
(Syzygium aromaticum), tansy tea (Tanacetum vulgare), hagenia (Hagenia 
abyssinica), garlic (Allium sativum), pine-apple (Ananas comosus), kalonji 
(Nigella sativa) seeds, male fern (Dryopteris filix-mas), plumeria (P. acutifolia or 
P. rubra), pumpkin (Cucurbita pepa) seeds (fig. 34.3). 
 
Many natural anthelminthics are poisonous and, in improper dosages, 
dangerous for humans, as well as for parasites. 
 
 
A 
B 
C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 34.3. Some medicinal plants used as antihelminthics: A – Dryopteris filix-mas; 
B – Allium sativum; C – Arthemisia cina; D – Cucurbita pepa. 

Chapter 34.  ANTIHELMINTHIC DRUGS 
535
 
 
 
 
 
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
№1. All the listed drugs are antihelminthics, except: 
 
 
Mebendazole 
 
 
Metronidazole 
 
 
Niclosamide 
 
 
Pyrantel pamoate 
 
 
Piperazine adipinate 
 
№2. The antihelminthic affecting microtubular function in nematodes is: 
 
 
Praziquantel 
 
 
Niclosamide 
 
 
Piperazine adipinate 
 
 
Mebendazole 
 
 
Ivermectin. 
 
№3. The correct statements concerning the mechanisms of action of antihel-
minthics are: 
 
 
Mebendazole disturbs parasite’s microtubules and glucose uptake 
 
 
Niclosamide causes paralysis of microfilariae 
 
 
Pyrantel is depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent for nematodes 
 
 
Ivermectin interferes with receptors of parasite’s chloride channels 
 
 
Praziquantel stimulates GABA receptors in parasitic worms. 
 
№4. The true indications for to the use of antihelminthics are: 
 
 
Roundworm disease is treated by pyrantel pamoate or mebendazole 
 
 
Pinworm disease is treated by niclosamide 
 
 
Filariasis is treated by diethylcarbamazine 
 
 
Tapeworm disease is treated by niclosamide 
 
 
Whipworm disease is not treated with mebendazole. 
 
№5. A patient with roundworm disease was prescribed with antihelminthic 
preparation for a single-dose therapy. This drug also stimulates T-
dependent immune reactions, increases the activity of phagocytes, and is 
used to regulate the immune balance in collagenosis. What 
antihelminthic was prescribed? 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
Mebendazole 
 
 
Pyrantel pamoate 
 
 
Niclosamide 
 
 
Piperazine 
 
 
Levamisole. 
 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – B; № 2 – D; № 3 – A, C, D; № 4 – A, C, D; № 5 – E. 

Chapter 34.  ANTIHELMINTHIC DRUGS 
537
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 PHARMACOTHERAPY OF 
ACUTE POISONINGS. 
RADIOPROTECTORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
POISONINGS 
 
Poisoning is the result of the action of a toxic agent or a toxic dose of the 
drug on the organism. 
Poisonings may be acute and chronic. They are divided into household, envi-
ronmental, industrial, pharmacological. 
 
Poisoning with pharmacological agents results from: 
 
 
an absolute overdose (administration of a toxic dose of the drug) 
 
 
a relative overdose (caused by a therapeutic dose under the conditions of 
drug accumulation, hepatic and renal insufficiency, etc.). 
 
Main syndromes accompanied acute poisonings 
 
Acute poisonings may be accompanied by: 
 
 
CNS disturbances: coma, unconsciousness, seizures 
 
 
cardiovascular disturbances: heart failure, collapse, arrhythmia 
 
 
respiration disorders: a spasm of bronchi, pulmonary edema, a respiratory 
arrest, asphyxia 

 
GI disorders: vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, constipation, a loss of appetite 
 
 
liver lesions: hepatic necrosis, hepatic insufficiency 
 
 
renal insufficiency 
 
 
lesions of the skin and mucous membranes: necrosis, irritation, 
exfoliation, rash. 
 
Principles of poisonings treatment 
 
There are four basic principles of poisoning treatment: 
 
 
the termination of poison exposure 
 
 
the fastening of the elimination of a toxic agent from the body 
 
 
antidote administration 
 
 
general supportive and symptomatic therapy. 
 
According to this principles, the treatment of poisoning includes: 
 
 
detoxication therapy (non-specific) 
 
 
symptomatic therapy (non-specific) 
 
 
antidote therapy (specific). 
 
DETOXICATION THERAPY 
 
The main purposes of detoxication therapy are to reduce poison absorption 
and to enhance the removal of poison. 
 
For the reduction of absorption the following is used: 
 
 
The irrigation of the skin and mucous membranes with cold water, an 
isotonic solution of sodium chloride, in some cases with special antidotes 
(e.g. a weak solution of ammonia for the neutralizing of formaldehyde; 
oil for the washing out of phenol; 2% solution of sodium chloride for the 
neutralizing of silver nitrate) 
 
 
The lavage of the stomach with potassium permanganate (in poisoning 
with alkaloids), cold water (in poisoning with acids or alkalis), etc. 
 
Emesis induced with apomorphine (parenterally), a solution of ammonia 
(dissolved in water, per os), or mechanically 
 
The use of adsorbents (activated charcoal, enterosgel) 
 
 
The use of astringents (tannin, milk, egg-white) 
 
 
The use of osmotic purgatives (magnesium sulfate) which form high 
osmotic pressure in the lumen of the intestine and bowel and in such a 
way inhibit absorption of the toxic agent 
 
For the enhancement of poison removal the following is used: 
 
 
Forced diuresis with furosemide or mannitol 
 
 
The altering of urinary pH (alkalinization for acidic substances and acidi-
fication for alkaline drugs) 

Chapter 35.  PHARMACOTHERAPY OF ACUTE POISONINGS 
539
 
 
Peritoneal dialysis, hemodialysis, hemosorbtion 
 
 
The use of osmotic purgatives (magnesium sulfate, sodium sulfate) 
 
 
The administration of drugs stimulating enzymes activity in the liver for 
the fastening of poison metabolism (e.g. phenobarbital; glucose, and 
vitamins in poisoning with ethanol) 
 
Analeptics for the stimulation of respiration and an increase of the 
excretion of poison through the lungs (Carbogenum, etimizol). 
 
SYMTOMATIC THERAPY 
 
It is a therapy aimed at the supporting of damaged functions of the organism 
and resuscitation. General supporting and symptomatic therapy are needed in most 
cases of poisonings. It is achieved according to the main syndromes of 
intoxication and is the same in different poisonings. 
 
A seizures attack is treated by: 
 
–  anxiolytics: diazepam (IV, IM) 
 
–  neuroleptics: chlorpromazine (IV, IM) 
 
–  IV general anesthetics: sodium oxybutyrate (IV, IM) 
 
–  magnesium salts: magnesium sulfate (IV, IM). 
 
–  N-cholinergic agonists: Cytitonum (IV), lobeline hydrochloride (IV). 
The inhibition of respiration should be treated with: 
 
– analeptics: niketamide (IV, SC), camphor (SC), sulfocamphocaine (IV, IM, 
SC), bemegride (IV), etimizol (IV), Carbogenum (carbon dioxide + oxygen, by 
inhalation). 
 
Pulmonary edema needs emergency help, such as: 
 
–  diuretics: furosemide (IV), mannitol (IV infusion), Urea pura (IV infusion) 
 
– drugs caused the redistribution of blood: ganglia blockers (hygronium, IV 
infusion; pentamine, IV, or IM); peripheral vasodilators (nitroglycerine, IV; 
sodium nitroprusside, IV infusion) 
–  cardiac glycosides: strophanthin (IV), corglycon (IV) 
 
–  glucocorticoids: prednisolone (IM, IV) 
 
–  narcotic analgesics: morphine hydrochloride 
 
–  surfactants: exosurf, curosurf 
 
–  oxygen with anti-foam agents (vapor of ethanol). 
 
– α- and α,β–adrenergic agonists: phenylepiphrine (IM, SC, or IV), 
noradrena-line hydrotartrate (IV infusion), adrenaline hydrochloride (SC) 
–  analeptics: niketamide (SC, IV), camphor (SC), sulfocamphocaine (IV, IM, 
 
SC). 

540 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Acute heart failure is treated by: 
 
–  cardiac glycosides from Strophanthus group: stophanthin (IV), corglycon 
 
(IV) 
 
–  non-glycoside inotropic agents: dobutamine (IV infusion). 
 
ANTIDOTE THERAPY 
 
Antidotes are drugs specifically interacting with some poisons. They act 
either by the preventing of absorption or by inactivating or antagonizing the action 
of the poisons. Specific antidotes are not available for all poisons (e.g. acute 
poisoning with phenol). 
 
GENERAL MECHANISMS OF ANTIDOTE ACTION 
 
Antidotes exert an antitoxic effect by a variety of mechanisms: 
 
 
binding to receptors (e.g. atropine, naloxone) 
 
 
acting on enzymes (e.g. cholinesterase reactivators) 
 
 
displacement from tissue binding sites (e.g. ethanol under the conditions 
of poisoning with methanol) 
 
exchanging with poison, binding to poison (e.g. chelating agents) 
 
 
the replenishment of depleted essential substances (e.g. sulfur containing 
agents) 
 
CLASSIFICATION OF ANTIDOTES 
 
 Sulfur containing compounds 
 
–  Dimercaprol (Unithiol) 
 
–  Sodium thiosulfate 
 
–  Acetylcysteine 
 
 Chelating agents 
 
–  Sodium edeteate (trilon B, EDTA–Natrium) 
 
–  Tetacin-calcium (Calcium-EDTA) 
 
–  Deferoxamine (desferral) 
 
–  Penicillamine 
 
 Cholinesterase reactivators 
 
–  Pralidoxim (PAM) 
 
–  Alloxim 
 
–  Dipiroxim 
 
–  Isonitrosine 

Chapter 35.  PHARMACOTHERAPY OF ACUTE POISONINGS 
541
 
 Antagonists of opioids 
 
–  Naloxone 
 
–  Naltrexone 
 
 M-cholinoblockers 
 
–  Atropine sulfate 
 
 Anticholinesterases 
 
–  Neostigmine (Proserinum) 
 
 Preparations of other groups 
 
–  Cromosmonum (Methyleni coeruleum) 
 
–  Ethanol (Spiritus aethylicus) 
 
–  Potassium permanganate 
 
–  Activated charcoal (Carbo activatus). 
 
SULFUR-CONTAINING AGENTS 
 
DIMERCAPROL (UNITHIOL) 
 
 
is a mercaptide by its chemical structure 
 
 
contains two SH-groups and forms two bonds with metal ions 
 
 
is an analogue of the drug British anti-lewisite (BAL, dimercaptoprol) 
 
 
is administered IM, orally (in chronic poisonings) 
 
 
has a complex mechanism of action: 1) it forms bonds between SH-groups 
and metal ions with the formation of inactive complexes which are excreted 
with urine; 2) it prevents metals binding to tissue proteins; 3) it restores the 
activity of SH-groups of enzymes as a donator of SH- groups (fig. 35.1) 
 
 
is indicated in poisonings with arsenic compounds, mercury, lead, in 
cardiac glycosides poisoning, streptomycin poisoning, hepatocerebral 
dystrophy, the treatment of alcoholism 
 
 
may cause nausea, tachycardia, dizziness, paleness. 
 
SODIUM THIOSULFATE 
 
 
is administered orally or IV 
 
 
contains sulfur and forms non-toxic compounds with ions of metals, the 
cyanic acid, bromides and iodides; converts cyanomethemoglobin to thio-
cyanate which is excreted 
 
 
has antitoxic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-allergic properties 
 
 
is used in poisonings with heavy metals, cyanides, iodine and bromine 
salts, as well as for allergic diseases, arthritis, neurolgia. 

542 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
ACETYLCYSTEINE 
 
 
is known as mucolytic for the treatment of diseases of the lungs and bronchi 
 
 
is administered IM and orally (for intoxication) 
 
 
contains one SH-group 
 
 
is used in poisonings with metals and acetominophen (paracethamol). In 
the last case it is used for the replacement of depleted essential substance 
(as glutathion substitute). 
 
 
 
Metal ions 
Enzymes 
–SH 
–SH 
Sulfur-containing 
agent 
Elimination of 
Restoration of 
thiolic enzymes 
metal ions, 
activity 
prevention of 
their action on 
proteins 
 
 
 
Fig. 35.1. Mechanism of action of sulfur-containing drugs. 
 
CHELATING AGENTS 
 
Chelators are organic compounds which can form stable covalent-coordinate 
bonds with cationic metal ions excreted from the body (fig. 35.2). 
 
SODIUM EDETEATE 
 
 
is administered by IV infusion 
 
 
forms complex compounds with different metal ions, especially with calcium 
 
 
is used in poisonings with metal salts, cardiac glycosides, as well as in 
pathological calcification 
 
can cause hypocalcemia and tethany in a quick administration. 

Chapter 35.  PHARMACOTHERAPY OF ACUTE POISONINGS 
543
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 35.2. Mechanism of action of chelators (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
TETACIN-CALCIUM 
 
 
is administered IV and orally (in chronic intoxication) 
 
 
is used for the treatment of poisonings with compounds of thorium, lead, 
cobalt, mercury, uranium, yttrium 
 
may cause gastrointestinal disturbances, toxic nephrosis, a decrease in the 
contents of hemoglobin, ferrous, and vitamin B12 
 
is contraindicated for patients with diseases of the liver and kidney. 
 
PENICILLAMINE 
 
 
is a synthetic preparation similar to the fragment of penicillin’s molecule 
 
 
is taken orally 
 
 
forms complex compounds with metal ions (copper, lead, mercury, iron, calcium) 
 
 
is used in acute and chronic poisonings with heavy metals, as well as in 
hepapocerebral dystrophy (Wilson’s disease) and some collagen diseases 
(rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma) 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
may cause leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, hematuria, proteinuria, 
myalgia, arthralgia, itch, utricaria, gastrointestinal disturbances. 
  
DEFEROXAMINE 
 
 
is administered IM, IV, orally, or used for the lavage of the stomach 
 
 
binds to free ions of iron and to iron from ferrous-containing proteins 
(fer-ritin and hemosiderin); does not interact with iron from hemoglobin 
and enzymes; does not influence the content of other ions 
 
is used for the treatment of acute poisoning with ferrous compounds, 
hemo-chomatosis, hemosiderosis 
 
may cause skin rash, collapse (after a quick IV injection). 
 
CHOLINESTERASE REACTIVATORS 
 
Cholinesterase reactivators (alloxim, dipiroxim, isonitroside, obidoxime) 
are drugs for the restoration of acetylcholine esterase activity in acute poisonings 
with organophosphate compounds (fig. 35.3). 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
 
They interact with phosphor and split off phosphor from the etheric site 
of cholinesterase, cause the reactivation of enzyme. 
 
They interact with poison and neutralize it. 
 
 
They are the most effective if are used for the prophylaxis of poisoning or 
at the beginning of poisoning. 
 
Cholinesterase reactivators are administered together with atropine. 
 
ANTAGONISTS OF OPIOID RECEPTORS 
 
Naloxone is an antidote of narcotic analgesics. It displaces drugs from opioid 
receptors (fig. 35.4). 
 
M–CHOLINOBLOCKERS 
 
Atropine is an antidote to M-cholinergic agonists. It is also used in 
poisonings with anticholinesterases and morphine. 
 
ANTICHOLINESTERASES 
 
Neostigmine, physostigmine, galanthamine are antidotes to M-
cholinoblockers and antidepolarizing myorelaxants. 

Chapter 35.  PHARMACOTHERAPY OF ACUTE POISONINGS 
545
 
 
METHYLENE BLUE 
 
 
is an antiseptic with the properties of a donator and acceptor of hydrogen 
 
 
is administered IV in the form of sterile solution (Chromosmonum) 
 
 
is used for the treatment of acute poisonings with cyanides, carbon oxide, 
hydrogen sulfide. Under the conditions of cyanide poisoning Methylenum 
coeruleum converts hemoglobin into methhemoglobin which interacts with 
cyanides and transforms them into non-toxic compounds. 
 
ETHANOL 
 
 
is an antidote to methyl alcohol 
 
 
replaces methanol in metabolic systems and in such a way prevents 
methy-laldehyde forming. 
 
POTASSIUM PERMANGANATE 
 
 
is an antiseptic from oxidazers group 
 
 
is an antidote in poisonings with morphine, some alkaloids, and phosphor 
 
 
is used for the lavage of the stomach as 0,1–0,5% solution 
 
 
is not effective in poisonings with atropine, cocaine, and barbiturates. 
 
ACTIVATED CHARCOAL 
 
 
is an adsorbent containing pores which absorb low weight molecules of 
toxic agents 
 
is taken orally in the form of aqueous suspension or tablets (in light 
intoxi-cation or in chronic toxicity) 
 
is an universal antidote. 
 
 
SOME INTOXICATIONS AND THEIR TREATMENT 
 
Acute poisoning with organophosphates 
 
(irreversible anticholinesterases) 
 
Signs: 
 
hypersalivation, nausea, vomiting, spasm of the bronchi, then edema of 
lungs, convulsions, unconsciousness. 
 
Emergency help: 

546 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 35.3. Reactivation of acetylcholine 
Fig. 35.4. Competition between 
esterase with obidoxime 
morphine and naloxone 
(by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
(by R. Finkel et al., 2000). 
 
 
Reactivators of cholinesterase (dipyroxim, alloxim, izonitrozin), IM 
 
 
Atropine, IM. 
 
Acute poisoning with ethanol 
 
Signs: 
 
specific odor; excitement, then sleeping and coma; hyperemia of the face, 
then paleness; a decrease in BP; suppression of respiration; hyporeflexia; 
hypotermia; involuntary urination and defecation. 
 
Emergency help: 
 
 
Lavage of the stomach with the solution of potassium permanganate 
 
 
Analeptics (bemegride) 
 
 
Glucose, insulin, and vitamins preparations (IV) 
 
 
Nootrops (piracetam, IV). 

Chapter 35.  PHARMACOTHERAPY OF ACUTE POISONINGS 
547
 
Acute poisoning with morphine 
 
Signs: 
 
sleep or unconsciousness, normal or increased reflexes, a normal muscles 
tone, miosis, bradycardia, Cheyne-Stokes breath, the retention of urination, a 
spasm of the intestine and bowel. 
 
Emergency help: 
 
 
The lavage of the stomach with 0,5% solution of potassium permanganate 
 
 
Naloxone, IV ( an antagonist of narcotic analgesics) 
 
 
Atropine (for a decrease in the vagal action of morphine). 
 
Acute poisoning with cardiac glycosides 
 
Signs: 
 
bradycardia, then tachycardia and arrhythmia (premature ventricular beats, fibr-
tillation); changes in ECG; an increase in signs of CHF; anorexia, vomiting, nausea; 
headache, fatigue, hallucination; vision disturbances (xantopsia, micro- and macropsia). 
Emergency help: 
 
 
The abolishing of cardiac glycoside 
 
 
Drugs containing potassium (potassium chloride, panangin) 
 
 
SH-group donator (dimercaprol, or unithiol) 
 
 
Anti-arrhythmic agents (phenitoin, lidocaine, propranolol, an atropine for 
AV block) 
 
Digoxin antibodies (digibind) 
 
 
Glucose, vitamins preparations, oxygen inhalation. 
 
Acute poisoning with hypnotics (barbiturates) 
 
Signs: 
 
sleeping, unconsciousness, hypotonia, the lowering of reflexes, the 
suppression of respiration, a decrease in BP. 
 
Emergency help: 
 
 
The lavage of the stomach 
 
 
The alkalinization of urine and forced diuresis 
 
 
Hemodialysis 
 
 
Salt purgatives (magnesium sulfate). 
 
Acute poisoning with acids and alkalis 
 
Signs: 
 
necrosis of the skin and mucous membranes (coagulation necrosis caused by 
acid or coliquation necrosis caused by alkali); metabolic acidosis (if an acid is a 
toxic agent); severe pain. 

548 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Emergency help: 
 
 
The neutralizing of the acid by solution of sodium bicarbonate and the 
neutralizing of the alkali by weak solution of the acid (acetic acid, citric 
acid) on the surface of skin 
 
 
The lavage of the stomach with cold water 
 
 
The administration of covering drugs, astringents, and local anesthetics 
into the stomach 
 
In poisoning with acids – sodium bicarbonate (IV) for the correction of 
metabolic acidosis 
 
Narcotic analgesics for a decrease in pain. 
 
Acute poisoning with salts of heavy metals (e.g. mercury) 
 
Signs: 
 
severe pains in the abdomen, vomiting and diarrhoea with admixtures of 
blood, metal aftertaste, hypersalivation, bleeding gums, 2-3 days after – acute 
renal failure, hypochomic anemia, irritateability, irritability. 
 
Emergency help: 
 
 
The lavage of the stomach 
 
 
The administration of activated charcoal and astringents in the stomach 
 
 
Dimercaprol (unithiol), tetacin-calcium, or sodium thiosulfate 
 
 
Atropine for a decrease in a spasm of the GI tract 
 
 
Morphine 
 
 
Hemodialysis. 
 
RADIOPROTECTIVE AGENTS 
 
Radioprotectors are compounds that are designed to reduce the damage in nor-
mal tissues caused by radiation. These compounds are often antioxidants and must be 
present before or at the time of radiation for effectiveness. Other agents, termed 
mitigators, may be used to minimize toxicity even after radiation has been delivered. 
Effective radioprotectors include compounds containing sulfhydryl (thiol) 
groups (-SH), such as cysteine, mercaptoamines and indolylalkylamines. 
Radioprotectors diminish the consequences of irradiation, that is, its fatal and 
nonfatal effects, includ-ing genetic effects. They also reduce the intracellular or 
interstitial oxygen pressure and increase the amount of endogenous thiols. 
 
The effectiveness of radioprotectors is expressed by a dose reduction factor, 
which is equal to the ratio of radiation doses producing identical effects in the pres-
ence or absence of radioprotectors. The dose reduction factor depends on the physical 
properties of radiation, conditions of irradiation, and properties off the body. 

Chapter 35.  PHARMACOTHERAPY OF ACUTE POISONINGS 
549
 
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
 Thiols and other SH-containing compounds 
 
– Cysteine 
 
– Cystamine 
 
– 2-mercaptoethylguanidine 
 
– Thiourea 
 
– Thiouracil 
 
– Dithiocarbamate 
 
 Indolalkylamines: 
 
– Tryptamin 
 
– Serotonin 
 
– Mexamine 
 
 Arylalkylamines 
 
– Epinephrine 
 
– Norepinephrine 
 
– Dopamine 
 
 Other agents 
 
– Ethyl alcohol 
 
– Analgesics (morphine, salicylates) 
 
– Cholinergic drugs (metacholine) 
 
– Hormonal preparations (corticosteroids, thyroid hormones) 
 
– Derivatives of nucleic acids (ATP) 
 
– Imidazole 
 
– Adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (cAMP) 
 
– Antibiotics 
 
– lipids (olive oil) 
 
– Adsorbents (enterosgel) 
 
– Vitamins-antioxidants (ascorbic acid, tocopherol acetate) 
 
– Chelating agents. 
 
CYSTAMINE 
 
 
is well known radioprotective preparation 
 
 
belongs to the group of aminothiols, is used as dihydrochloride 
 
 
is taken orally; quickly and completely absorbed; well penetrates into 
vari-ous organs and tissues; is excreted with urine. The effect develops 
within 10-30 min and lasts about 5 hrs. 

 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
 
 
radioprotective effect is based on the ability to bind free radicals, ionized 
and excited molecules formed in tissues upon irradiation, as well as on 
the ability to interact with certain enzymes and to impart them the 
resistance to ionizing radiation.is used to prevent harmful effects of 
irradiation including the prevention of the complications in radiotherapy. 
 
 
side effects are burning sensation in the esophagus, nausea, gastralgia, a 
decrease in BP, allergic reactions, increased action of antihypertensive drugs. 
  
TESTS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
 
1. All the statements regarding the treatment of acute poisoning are 
correct, except: 
 
A. Activated charcoal binds to many toxins 
 
В.  Gastric lavage decreases the absorption of poison 
 
 
Potassium permanganate is used for the lavage of the stomach 
 
 
Apomorphine is an ideal emetic in poisonings with acids and alkalis 
 
 
Specific antidotes are not available for all poisons. 
 
 
2. Deferoxamine is: 
 
A. A sulfur-containing compound 
 
В.  An acetylcholine esterase reactivator 
 
 
A chelating agent used in poisoning with ferrous compounds 
 
 
An antidote in mercury poisoning 
 
 
A drug for the treatment of hepatocerebral dystrophy. 
 
 
3. The treatment of mercury poisoning includes: 
 
A. Deferoxamine 
В. Unithiolum C. 
Penicillinamine D. 
Atropine 
 
E.  Hemodialysis. 
 
№4. Forcsed diuresis is: 
 
A. Specific antidote therapy 
 
В.  Realized by the hydratation and further administration of furosemide 
 
 
Non-specific detoxication therapy 
 
 
Used to hasten the elimination of poison from blood through the kidney 
 
 
Realized by the dehydratation and use of potassium-sparing diuretics. 

Chapter 35.  PHARMACOTHERAPY OF ACUTE POISONINGS 
551
 
№5. A patient with symptoms of the phosphororganic poisoning was admited 
to the emergency department. Which combination of drugs must be used 
as fist aid? 
 
A. Naloxone and atropine 
 
 
Unithiolum and potassium chloride 
C. Neostigmine and chlorpromazine D. 
Unithiolum and EDTA 
 
E.  Alloxim and atropine. 
 
Answers 
 
№ 1 – D; № 2 – C; № 3 – B, C, D, E; № 4 – B, C, D; № 5 – E. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 GENERAL 
PRESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STRUCTURE OF PRESCRIPTION 
 
AND MAIN RULES OF PRESCRIBING 
 
The prescription of medicinal preparations is a practical skill in Pharmacology. A 
prescription is a written doctor’s appeal to a pharmacist about the making, 
delivery and marks of medicinal form. A prescription is a juridical document for 
 
which a doctor bears justifiable responsibility. 
 
The component parts of the prescription (in Latin): 
 
 
Inscriptio 
 
 
Prepositio 
 
 
Designatio materiarum: 
 
–  adjuvans 
 
–  corrigens 
 
–  constituens 
 
 
Subscriptio 
 
 
Signatura 
 
 
Nomen medici. 
 
A prescription is written according to the current decree with an ink or ball-point 
pen clearly without corrections.The names of medicinal substances in Designatio 

materiarum are written with a capital letter in a column in Latin and in Genitive 
Case. The word “gram” is not written, it is replaced with a comma. 
 
Basis is the main substance which removes a cause or a leading symptom of 
illness; 
 
Adjuvans is an auxiliary substance which strengthens or adds the action of 
the main substance or lessen side-effects. 
 
Corrigens improves the taste, color, or smell of medicine. They use sugar, 
syrup, essential oils as corrigens. 
 
Constituens is a forming inert substance that gives medicine consistence and 
mass. 
 
Signature is filled in the native language of a patient. In this part of prescrip-
tion taking a dose for one administration is shown (a tablespoon, one powder, 
etc.), the time of taking (for the night, after meal), the number of daily takings (3 
times a day, in an hour, etc.), the way of taking (inside, a gargle, for injections and 
etc.). It is impossible to use unclear expressions: “inside”, “taking is known”. 
 
Abbreviation in a prescription is possible according to a generally used one 
and it must not attribute to the substances which have similar names. Marking the 
amount of substances which are taking in equal dose, a doctor must use the word 
“ana” and hand mark the dose only once at the last ingredient. 
 
At the beginning of the urgent prescription it is necessary to make a note 
“Cito!”, “Citissime” or “Statim!” The recurring making of medicine according to 
a prescrip-tion is made with the help of “Repetatur!” 
 
Prescribing poison or drastic substance in the dose which exceeds the 
maximum one a doctor must write out a dose of this substance in words and put an 
exclama-tion mark. 
 
Units of mass measuring of medicinal substances which are supplied to 
patients are: gram – 1.0; decigram – 0.1; centigram –0.01; milligram – 0.001. A 
prescrip-tion is written out as a special form. For the majority of medicinal forms 
we use “Form №1” (fig. 36.1). Form №2 is for the prescribing of drugs which are 
free of charge. Form №3 is for narcotic and poisonous drugs. 
 
MEDICINMAL FORMS AND THEIR CLASSIFICATION 
 
Medicinal form is a shape of medicine in which it is supplied to a patient. 
Medicinal forms are divided into dosed and non-dosed forms. Forms for internal 
 
use and injections are prescribed with the indication of a dose and are called dosed 
medicinal forms. Forms for external use are prescribed with the total amount of 
drug and are dosed by patient. Dosed medicinal forms are divided into non-liquid 
(solid), liquid, soft, and sterile forms (fig. 36.2). Non-dosed medicinal forms may 
also be non-liquid (solid), liquid, and soft. 

554 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
 
NON-LIQUID DOSED MEDICINAL FORMS 
 
Non-liquid dosed medicinal forms are represented by powders, capsules, 
dragee, and tablets (fig. 36.3). The positive qualities are: stability, a convenient 
tak-ing, the exactness of closage, protection from the action of destroying enzymes 
for some forms. For dragee, it is an opportunity of incompatible medicinal 
substances’ combinations. The defects are: a slow action, the impossibility to 
prescribe to little children, to patients in faint state, etc. 
  
MEDICINAL FORMS 
Dosed 
Non-dosed 
Non-liquid 
Soft 
Non-liquid 
Soft 
(solid) 
(solid) 
Liquid 
Forms for in- 
Liquid 
jections (sterile) 
 
Fig. 36.2. Classification of medicinal forms. 
 
Dosed powders are non-liquid medicinal forms with the exact dosage of the 
medicine for one taking. The mass of powders is minimum – 0.1 g, maximum – 
1.0 g, average – 0.3-0.5 g. 
 
The classification is: 1) simple powders which contain only one substance; 2) 
complex powders which have two and more ingredients. 
 
To prescribe a simple powder with the mass of more than 0,1 are written the 
name of drug, the dose, then the sentence “Da tales doses numero 10”, and 
“Signa” after which there are instructions about drug taking. 
 
Powders which have a less mass than a minimal one need the addition of 
filling (sugar, glucose) and are written in full form with the list of all the 
ingredients and indication “Misce ut fiat pulvis” in the subscription. 
 
Capsules are the covers for packing powders or some liquid medicines in them 
for taking inside. The rules of the prescribing capsules differ from the rules of 

Chapter 36.  GENERAL PRESCRIPTION 
555
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 36.1. Form №1 for prescribing of most of drugs. 
 
prescribing of simple powders with the mass exceeding 0,1 only that in 
Subscriptio after showing the amount of supplying doses the name of capsule form 
is written: “in capsules” (in caps.). 
 
Tablets and dragee are industrial medicinal forms. The positive qualities of 
them are: the exactness of dosage, portability, the convenience of preservation and 
delivery. Tablets and dragee mask unpleasant taste, protect the teeth and mucous 
membrane of the oral cavity from the destruction. In dragee it is possible to 
combine substances which are incompatible for different reasons (e.g. vitamins of 
B complex). Their negative quality is slow action; sometimes they don’t dissolve. 

556 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
Mixing and 
tarming by 
Drug 
-0.5 – 500 mg 
compression 
Effervescent 
tablet 
Filler 
30 – 250 mg 
Disintegrating 
20 – 200 mg 
agent 
Tablet 
Capsule 
Other 
30 – 15 mg 
excipients 
min 100-1000 mg max 
Coated tablet 
possible tablet size 
 
 
Fig. 36.3. Non-liquid (solid) medicinal forms (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
The rules of tablets prescribing are the same as the ways of prescribing 
capsules, but in Subscriptio it is written “in tabulettis” (in tab.). 
The rules of dragee prescribing are similar to tablets prescribing, but the word 
“Dragee” is written before the drug’s name. In this case, there is no name of me-
dicinal form in Subscriptio. 
 
Combined tablets and dragee with a commercial name (trade mark) are pre-
scribed in another way: Tabulettarum (or Dragee), the drug’s name, the amount of 
doses (numero 10), then “Da”, “Signa” and instructions how to use this 
medicinal form. In such prescriptions, drug’s name is given in the Nominative 
Case and in inverted commas. 
 
Beside above mentioned non-liquid dosed medicinal forms there are other ones 
prescribed more rarely. Сachets are shells for powders, which are obtained by pressing 
a mixture of wheat flour, starch and water between heated metal plates. Glossettes are 
small tablets intended for sublingual use. Lorenge is a solid mass of a flat shape that is 
obtained by mixing medicinal substances with sugar and mucus used to treat patients 
with pathology of the oral mucosa or inside in diseases of the digestive canal. Caramel 
is a solid dosed medicinal form made similar to sweets by mixing medicinal 
substances with sugar, molasses, flavoring substances, and dyes. Microdragees have a 
diameter of 30-50 μm and are characterized by different release times of the active 
substances depending on the ratio of the drug and the coating substance. Spansules are 
capsules for oral administration, which contain a 

Chapter 36.  GENERAL PRESCRIPTION 
557
 
microdragee of medicinal substances with different duration of action. Granules is 
non-liquid dosed medicinal form with homogeneous particles (0.2 -3 mm) of round, 
cylindrical or irregular shape for oral administration manufactured in industrial way. 
 
The main abbreviations used for prescribing of non-liquid dosed medicinal forms are: 
Rp. (Recipe), D. t. d. N. 10 (Da tales doses numero decem); M. f. pulv. (Misce ut fiat 
pulvis); in caps (in capsulis); in tab. (in tabulettis); drag. (dragee); S. (Signa). 
 
Examples of prescribing of non-liquid dosed medicinal forms: 
 
Powder (pulvis) 
Tablet (tabuletta) 
 
1. A simple powder with a weight more than 0,1 1. Simple and combined tablets 
 
Rp.: Amidopyrini 0,25 
Rp.: Reserpini 0,0001 
 
D. t. d. N. 10. 
D. t. d. N.10 in tab. 
 
S. Take 1 powder 3 times 
S. Take 1 tablet twice a day. 
 
a day. 
# 
 
# 
 
2. A powder with a weight less than 0,1 (Sugar 
2. Tablets with a commercial name 
 
should be added in the dose of 0,2-0,3) 
Rp.: Tab. ”Biseptolum” N. 10 
 
Rp.: Pyridoxini hydrochloridi 0,005 
D. S. Take 2 tablets twice daily. 
 
Acidi nicotinici 0,05 
# 
 
Riboflavini 0,01 
Dragee (dragee) 
 
Sacchari 0,2 
1. Simple dragee 
 
M. f. pulv. 
Rp.: Drag. Diazolini 0,05 
 
D. t. d. N. 10. 
D. t. d. N.10. 
 
S. Take 1 powder twice a day. 
S. Take 1 dragee 2 times a day. 
 
# 
# 
 
Capsule (capsula) 
2. Dragee with a commercial name 
 
1. Capsules containing a powder 
Rp.: Drag.”Undevitum” N. 10 
 
Rp.: Rifampicini 0,15 
D. S. Take 1 dragee once a day. 
 
D. t. d. N. 10 in caps. 
 
S. Take 1 capsule 3 times daily. 
 
# 
 
2. Capsules containing oil solution 
 
Rp.: Sol. Tocopheroli acetatis 
 
oleosae 20% - 0,5 ml 
 
D. t. d. N. 10 in caps. 
 
S. Take 1 capsule 2 times daily. 
 
MEDICINAL FORMS FOR INJECTIONS 
 
Injections may be intravenous (IV), intramuscular (IM), subcutaneous (SC), 
etc. The positive qualities of injections are: the exactness of dosage, the quickness 
of acting, the convenience of use for patients in a faint state (in the state of uncon- 

558 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
sciousness). The negative qualities are: pain, the necessity of sterility, the 
possibility of vessel damage, the transmission of infection, etc. 
 
For injections, drugs are often given as solutions and, less frequently, in crys-
talline suspension for IM and SC injection. An injectable solution must be free of 
infectious agents (sterile), pyrogens (apyrogenic) and suspended matter 
(homogenic). It should have the same osmotic pressure and pH as body fluids in 
order to avoid tissue damage at the site of injection. 
 
Solutions for injections are preserved in an airtight glass or plastic sealed 
containers (ampoules and flacons) (fig. 36.4; 36.5). 
From ampoules and flacons the solution is aspirated via a needle into a syringe 
(fig. 36.4). If injectable solutions are instable, ampoules or flacons contain dry sub-
stances dissolved aseptically before use. The cartridge ampoule is fitted into a special 
injector that enables its contents to be emptied via a needle (fig. 36.4). 
 
Sterile, iso-osmolar 
 
Ampule 
 
1–20ml 
 
Cartridge 
 
ampule 2 ml 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With and without 
 
fracture ring 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Often with 
 
preservative 
 
Fig. 36.4. Ampoules with sterile medicinal forms (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
An infusion refers to a solution being administered over an extended period 
of time (fig. 36.5). The solution for infusion must meet the same standards as the 
solution for injection. 
Medicinal forms for injections are of industrial manufacture (ampoules, 
flacons) and of chemist’s making (flacons). 
 
Medicinal forms for injections of industrial manufacture (officinal) are pre-
scribed in a short form of prescription by the method of a single dose. If a dose for 
one occasion has its packing (an ampoule), in Subscriptio after the amount of 
doses “in ampullis”(in ampull.) is written. 

Chapter 36.  GENERAL PRESCRIPTION 
559
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Infusion 
Multiple-dose 
solution 
500–1000 ml 
vial 50 – 100 ml 
 
Fig. 36.5. Flacons containing sterile solutions (adapted from H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
The rules of prescribing of the officinal sterile forms in flacons are similar, 
but the name of medicinal form is not indicated. 
 
Medicinal forms for injections of chemist’s making (magistral) can be pre-
scribed in a short as well as in a full form of prescription. In subscription, except usual 
marks, a note about medicine’s sterility must be done: “Sterilisetur!” (Steril.!). 
 
Main abbreviations: Sol. (solutio), in ampull. (in ampullis), Steril.! 
(Sterilisetur), IM (intramuscularly), SC (subcutaneously), IV (intravenously). 
Examples of prescribing of the sterile medicinal forms (ampoules and bottles): 
 
Ampoule (ampulla) 
Rp.: Sol. Promedoli 1% – 1 ml 
D. t. d. N.10 in ampull. 
S. Administer 1 ml IM, for pain. 
 
# 
 
Rp.: Sol. Retabolili oleosae 5% – 1 
ml D. t. d. N. 5 in ampull. 
 
S. Administer 1 ml IM, 
once a month. 
 
# 
 
Rp.: Cordіamini 2 ml 
D. t. d. N.10 in ampull. 
S. Administer 2 ml SC. 
 
# 
 
Rp.: Cocarboxilasi 0,05 
D. t. d. N. 10 in ampull. 
 
S. Dissolve in 2 ml of solvent, 
administer IM twice a day. 
 
Bottle (flacon) 
Rp.: Heparini 5 ml (5000 IU) 
D. t. d. N.10. 
S. IV. 
 
# 
 
Rp.: Kefzoli 0,5 
D. t. d. N. 10. 
 
S. Dissolve, administer IM every 
8 hrs. 
 
# 
 
Rp.: Sol. Glucosi 5% - 200 ml 
Steril.! 
 
D. S. By IV infusion. 

560 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
SOFT DOSED MEDICINAL FORMS 
 
The application of a drug via the rectal or vaginal route is achieved by means 
of suppositories and vaginal tablets (fig. 36.6). On rectal application, absorption 
into the systemic circulation may be intended. With vaginal suppositories or 
vaginal tablets, the effect is generally confined to the site of application. 
Suppositories contain cacao oil (Oleum Cacao) or some other Constituens, which 
are solid at usual tem-perature, but become liquid at body temperature. The weight 
of rectal suppositories is 1,0-4,0 (the average – 3,0). The weight of vaginal 
suppositories is from 1,5 to 6,0 (the average weight – 4,0). 
 
Suppositories may be prescribed in a full form, as well as in a short form. 
They may be written out by the method of a single dose, as well as by the method 
of a total dose. As a rule, a full form is used and the method of a single dose. A 
short form is suitable for suppositories of industrial manufacture (officinal) and for 
combined suppositories with commercial name. 
 
To prescribe rectal suppositories in a full form, are written the name of Basis 
and Adjuvans, their doses, then –”Olei Cacao 3,0”. In subscription it should be 
indicated: “Misce ut fiat suppositorium rectale. Da tales doses numero 10.” 
 
 
<35 °C 
 
 
 
Vaginal 
 
tablet 
 
Suppository 
 
 
 
 
 
> 15 °C Melting point 
 
Fig. 36.6. Suppositories as soft dosed medicinal form (by H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Prescribing of vaginal suppositories is similar and differs in the dose of Ol. 
 
Cacao (4,0) and the indication “in suppositorium vaginale”. 
 
To prescribe suppositories in a short form, “Suppositoriorum”, the name of the 
drug, the dose and the amount of suppositories (N. 10), are written then “Da. Signa” 
and instructions how to use this medication. The suppositories with a commercial 

Chapter 36.  GENERAL PRESCRIPTION 
561
 
name are prescribed without the dose. The drug’s name (a trade mark) is given in 
the Nominative Case with inverted commas. 
 
Main abbreviations: supp. rect. (suppositorium rectale), supp. vagin. 
(supposi-torium vaginale), M. f. supp. rect. (Misce ut fiat suppositorium rectale), 
M. f. supp. vagin. (Misce ut fiat suppositorium vaginale). 
 
Examples of suppositories prescribing: 
 
Rectal suppository 
 
(suppositorium rectale) 
 
 a full form, the method of a single dose 
 
Rp.: Digitoxini 0,00015 
 
Ol. Cacao 3,0 
 
M. f. supp. rect. 
 
D. t. d. N. 10. 
 
S. Administer rectally once a day. 
 
 a full form, the method of a total dose 
 
Rp.: Digitoxini 0,0015 
Ol. Cacao 30,0 
M. f. supp. rect. N. 10. 
 
D. S. Administer rectally once a day. 
 
# 
 
3. A short form 
 
Rp.: Supp. cum Digitoxino 
0,00015 N.10. 
 
D. S. Administer rectally once a day. 
# 
 
Vaginal suppository 
 
(suppositorium vaginale) 
 
 A full form, the method of a single 
dose Rp.: Metronidazoli 0,5 
 
Ol. Cacao 4,0 
 
M. f. supp. vagin. 
 
D. t. d. N. 10. 
 
S. Administer vaginally twice a day. 
 
 A full form, the method of a total 
dose Rp.: Metronidazoli 5,0 
Ol. Cacao 40,0 
 
M. f. supp. vagin. N. 10. 
 
D. S. Administer vaginally twice a day. 
 
# 
 
3. A short form 
 
Rp.: Supp. cum Metronidazolo 
0,5 N. 10. 
 
D. S. Administer vaginally twice a day. 
 
# 
 
 Suppositories with a commercial name 
Rp.: Supp. “Anaesthezolum” N 10. 
D. S. Administer vaginally twice a day. 
 
LIQUID DOSED MEDICINAL FORMS 
 
The advantages of liquid dosed medicinal forms are:1) they are sucked and 
act quicker; 2) they are convenient for children; 3) they are suitable for prescribing 
hygroscopic substances. The disadvantages are: less portability, unsteadiness, the 
difficulty of dosage. 
 
All liquid dosed medicinal forms for taking inside are prescribed by the method 
of a total dose. This is a method when after the name of a substance its total dose and 
the whole volume of medicine are noticed. The dose of the medicine for one 
administration (a tablespoon, 10 drops, etc.) is noticed in signature (fig. 36.7). 

562 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
All liquid medicinal forms which are prescribed for taking inside and are 
measu- red by spoons are only prepared with distilled water. 
 
Solution is a liquid dosed medicinal form that consists of a solvent and a 
soluble substance. The concentration of solutions prescribed in a short form can be 
expressed in mass-volume correlation, in percent , but by strong diluting it is 
expressed in the ratio (1:500, 1:1000, etc). 
 
The generally used volume units of dosage are: a tablespoon – 15 ml, a des-
sertspoon – 10 ml, a teaspoon – 5 ml. Solutions can be prescribed in a short or full 
form. They are prescribed for 3-4 days of the treatment in the volume of 100-200 
ml (average – 180 ml for 12 administrations). If the solution for internal use is 
written out in a short form, after “Recipe” it is indicated “Solutionis”, the name of 
the dis-solved substance in the Genetive Case and with the capital letter, the 
concentration of solution, its volume, “Da. Signa”, and instructions about usage. 
 
Solutions of drastic and poisonous substances are dosed in drops. They are named 
drops for internal use. These medicinal forms are prescribed for 10- 30 
administrations (average 20 takings). Drops are made on the account that 1 ml of water 
solution has 20 drops. Drops for taking inside are prepared from poisonous or drastic 
substances and are prescribed to a patient in a little amount (5-10 ml). The total dose of 
acting substance and the total amount of solution are also calculated proceeding from 
doses for one administration multiplied by the amount of takings. 
 
 
5
– 
50ml
Dosage: 
in drops 
5
– 
50ml
100 – 
500 ml
 
Dosage: 
 
in spoon 
 
Aqueous 
 
solution 
 
20 drops = 1 g 
 
 
Alcoholic 
 
solution 
 
40 drops = 1 g 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Solution 
 
Mixture 
 
Fig. 36.7. Dosage of liquid medicinal forms for taking inside 
 
(adapted from H. Lüllmann, 2000). 

Chapter 36.  GENERAL PRESCRIPTION 
563
 
 
Infusions and decoctions are aqueous extractions from medicinal plants. They 
are galenic preparations containing ballast substances. Infusions and decoctions are 
only prescribed in a short form of prescription. Prescribing infusions and decoctions, 
after “Recipe” the name of medicinal form is written, then the name of a plant part, the 
name of a plant itself, its total dose and the volume of fluid. A total dose is cal-culated 
proceeding from a dose for one administration. As infusions and decoctions are 
unstable forms and even in a refrigerator they are kept not more than 3-4 days, they are 
usually prescribed for 12 doses. The amount of medicinal raw materials and acting 
substances in infusion, decoctions, and mixtures are prescribed in grams. 
 
Mixtures, mixings of medicinal and correction substances in water, infusions 
or decoctions, are written in a full form of prescription. 
 
Tinctures, liquid extracts, and neogalenic preparations are alcohol-containing 
preparations from medicinal plants. They are taken by mouth and are dosed in drops. 
How many drops of such a medicinal form the patient must take inside for one 
administration, so many milliliters of tincture or extract should be prescribed. 
Tinctures, liquid extracts, and neogalenic preparations are prescribed in a short form. 
 
Sometimes we prescribe other dosed liquid forms such as suspensions and 
emulsions. They are liquid dispersion systems containing insoluble particles of 
solid substance or liquid. Magmas are suspensions with a large particle size of 
white, water insoluble substances, for example magnesium sulfate, bismuth, etc. 
Potion is liquid dosed medicinal form, which includes pharmacologically active 
substances, water and various syrups. In fact, these are sweetened mixtures. 
Lemonade is a sweet or acidified liquid for internal use. Elixir is transparent, 
aromatic, pleasant liquid taste, water-alcohol solution of one or more medicinal 
substances. Linctuse is liquid of dense consistency for use in small sips. Draughts 
is liquid medicinal product for a single use. Balsam is aromatic liquid of vegetable 
origin containing organic nitro-gen-free compounds: alcohols, essential oils, 
terpenes, resins, aldehydes, ketones, esters, and synthetic substances for antiseptic, 
deodorizing, topical, expectorant, and diuretic effect. Enema, or lavage is solution 
for administration into the rectum, which is cleansing, nutritious, therapeutic, or 
containing contrast agents before the investigation of the rectum. 
 
Liquid medicinal forms for adminisration through upper airways are 
inhalations and aerosols. Inhalation is dosed medicinal form used as highly 
dispersed liquid or vapor administered through the upper respiratory passways. 
Aerosol is spray, modern medicinal form of industrial manufacture for inhalation 
(dosed aerosol) or external use (non-dosed aerosol). As a rule, al above mentioned 
forms are prescribed in the short form. 

564 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Main abbreviations: Sol.(solutio), inf. (infusio), dec.(decoctio), tinct. 
(tinctura), extr.(extractum). 
 
Examples of prescribing of liquid dosed medicinal forms: 
 
Solution (solutio) 
Tincture (tinctura) 
Rp.: Sol. Natrii bromidi 3% – 180 ml 
Rp.: Тіnct. Valerianae 30 ml 
D. S. Take 1 tablespoon 2 times a day. 
D. S.Take 30 drops 3 times daily. 
# 
# 
Drops for internal use 
Liquid extract 
Rp.: Sol. Atropini sulfatis 0,1% – 10ml 
(extractum fluidum) 
D. S. Take 5 drops 2 times a day. 
Rp: Extr. Viburni fluidi 40 ml 
# 
D. S. Take 40 drops twice a day. 
Infusion (infusio) 
# 
or decoction (decoctio) 
Neogalenic preparation 
Rp. Dec. cort. Quercus 10,0 – 200 ml 
Rp: Adonisidi 20 ml 
D. S. Take 1 tablespoon 2 times a day. 
D. S. Take 20 drops twice a day. 
# 
# 
Mixture 
Rp:. Inf. herb. Thermopsidis 0,6 – 180ml 
Natrii hydrocarbonatis 3,0 
M. D. S. Take 1 tablespoon 2 
times a day. 
 
NON-DOSED MEDICINAL FORMS 
 
Non-dosed medicinal forms are forms for external use. They are prescribed 
without the dose. The total amount of the drug is indicated and the patient takes so 
much medication, as it’s necessary. Non-dosed medicinal forms are divided into 3 
groups: non-liquid (powders for external use, aspersions), liquid (solutions, eye drops, 
drops for ear or a nose, infusions, decoctions, tinctures, liquid extracts and mixtures for 
external use), soft (ointments, liniments, pastes, plasters, applicitions, poultices). 
 
The powder for external use is a very fine powder (Pulvis subtillissimus), 
containing only medicinal substances. Aspersion (Aspersio) is a very fine powder 
containing medicinal substance (or substances) and inert substances. As inert sub-
stances, they use Talcum, Zinci oxydum, Amylum. Powders for external use and 
aspersions are prescribed in a short form, as well as in a full form. Their amount 
may be from 5,0 to 100,0. If aspersion is prescribed in a short form, after “Rp” it 
is indicated “Aspersionis”, the name of the drug, the percent concentration and the 
total amount of such a medicinal form. 
 
Solutions (Solutio) for external use may be aqueous, oil, or alcohol. The 
amount of solution depends on the purpose of its application. 

Chapter 36.  GENERAL PRESCRIPTION 
565
 
Aqueous solutions for processing of dental root channels, drops for eyes, nasal 
drops, ear drops are prescribed in the amount of 10-20 ml, solutions for processing 
wounds – 50-500 ml, solutions for gargling – 200 ml, solutions for the lavage of the 
stomach and for disinfection – 500-1000 ml. As a rule, these solutions are prescribed 
in a short form, and their concentration is expressed in percent. 
 
Oil solutions are prescribed in the total amount of 10,0 -100,0. We can use 
“grams,” as well as “ml” to prescribe such medicinal forms. As a rule, they are 
pre-scribed in a short form with the term “oleosa” after the name of the drug. 
 
The volume of alcohol solution should be less than 100 ml. More often, they are 
prescribed in a short form with the word “spirituosa” after the medication’s name. 
 
Eye drops are the kind of solutions for external use, but they must be sterile. 
That is why eye drops are prescribed with the indication “Sterilisetur!” or 
abbrevia-tion “Steril.!”(fig. 36.8). 
 
 
Eye 
 
drops 
 
 
 
Sterile 
 
isotonic 
 
pH-neutral 
 
 
 
Viscous 
 
solution 
 
Nose 
 
drops 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 36.8. Eye drops and nasal drops as liquid non-dosed medicinal forms (by H. Lüllmann, 
2000). 
Infusions and decoctions for external use are always made in the correlation 
of 1:10, so they are prescribed without the indication of the weight of the dry me-
dicinal plant. Only the total amount of such liquid form is indicated according to 
the purpose of its application. 

566 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
Tinctures and liquid extracts as non-dosed medicinal forms are prescribed in 
the total amount less than 100 ml because of alcohol contents. 
 
Mixtures also may be prescribed for external use. In this case we use a full 
form of prescribing in which list all the ingredients of the drug and point “Misce”. 
 
Ointment (Unguentum) is a soft non-dosed medicinal form. It is characterized by 
plasticity and always contains medicinal substances and ointment basis (fig. 36.9). 
Ointment basis is represented by different lipids (Vaselinum, Lanolinum, Adeps suilis 
depuratus, etc.). Ointments may be prescribed in a short and full forms. As a rule, it is 
used a short form: after “Rp.” it is written “Unguenti” or the abbreviation “Ung.”, 
then the name of the drug, the percent concentration, and the total amount of ointment 
(from 10,0 to 100,0). Combined ointments with a commercial name and some simple 
officinal ointments are prescribed without their concentrations. 
 
There are liquid ointments (liniments) and dense ointments (pastes). 
Liniments (Linimentum) are made on liquid oils (e.g. Oleum Vaselini, Oleum 
Persicorum, Oleum Helianthi).They are prescribed similar to ointments. 
 
Pastes (Pasta) contain a lot of dry substances (more than 25%) (fig. 36.9). To 
form paste such inert substances as Talcum, Zinci oxydum, etc. are added to 
medicinal substances and ointment basis. 
 
 
 
 
 
Paste 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ointment 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 36.9. Soft non-dosed medicinal forms (adapted from H. Lüllmann, 2000). 
 
Some combined ointments, liniments, and pastes may be prescribed in a full 
form. In this case, all the ingredients of the medicinal form are listed with the fol-
lowing indication “Misce ut fiat unguentum (pasta, linimentum)”. 

Chapter 36.  GENERAL PRESCRIPTION 
567
 
Plaster is soft medicinal form, made as plastic mass, which is capable of 
soften-ing at body temperature and adhering tightly to the skin. There are solid 
plasters and liquid ones (skin glues that can form elastic film on the skin). 
 
Application is officinal dosed form of ointment-like or liquid) consistency. It 
is intended for application to the skin for treatment of injuries or for the 
destruction of parasites. 
 
Poultice is semi-solid form for application to the skin. It causes superficial 
hyperemia, improves blood circulation in areas of application. 
 
Main abbreviations used to prescribe non-dosed medicinal forms are: 
Asp.(Aspersio), subtil. (subtillissimus), Sol. (Solutio), Ung. (Unguentum), Lin. 
(Linimentum), M. f. ung. (Misce ut fiat unguentum), M. f. pasta (Misce ut fiat 
pasta), M. f. lin. (Misce ut fiat linimentum). 
 
Examples of prescribing of non-dosed medicinal forms: 

568 
PHARMACOLOGY.  V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. Devyatkina 
A powder for external use 
Infusion and decoction 
Rp.: Sulfadimezini subtil. 5,0 
for external use 
D. S.Apply on the wound. 
Rp.: Dec. cort. Quercus 200ml 
# 
D. S. For gargling. 
Aspersion (aspersio) 
# 
Rp.: Asp. Anaesthesini 5% - 50,0 
Tincture and liquid extract 
D. S. Apply on the wound. 
Rp.: Tinct. Calendulae 50ml 
# 
D. S. Dissolve 50 drops in 
Solution for external use 
100 ml of water, use for gargling. 
Rp.: Sol. Kalii permanganatis 0,1% – 200 ml 
# 
D. S. For gargling. 
Eye drops 
# 
Rp.: Sol. Atropini sulfatis 1% – 10 ml 
Rp.: Sol. Kalii permanganatis 0,5% – 1000 ml 
Steril.! 
D. S. For the lavage of the stomach. 
D. S. Eye drops. 
# 
# 
Rp.: Sol,. Anaesthesini oleosae 5% – 50 ml 
Ointment (unguentum) 
D. S. Oil mucous membrane 
Rp.: Ung. Prednisoloni 1% – 10,0 
of the oral cavity 
D. S. Apply on the skin. 
# 
# 
Rp.: Sol. Viridis nitentis spirituosae 1% – 10ml Rp.: Ung. “Synalar”10,0 
D. S. For the processing of small 
D. S. Apply on the skin. 
cuts of the skin. 
# 
# 
Liniment (linimentum) 
Rp.: Lin. Synthomycini 10% – 50,0 
 
D. S. Apply on the wound. 
 
# 
 
Paste (pasta) 
 
Rp.: Pastae Zinci 10,0 
 
D. S. Apply on the injured skin. 
 
Of course, nowadays there are many modern medicinal forms (e.g. aerosols, 
dissolved tablets, spansules, micronized forms, etc), but the forms described above 
stay the most spread. 
 
TASKS FOR SELF-CONTROL 
 
Prescribe the following medicinal forms: 
 
 
Powders of Thyreoidinum (0,02). Take 1 powder 3 times a day. 
 
 
Tablets of Pentoxylum (0,2). Take 1 tablet 3 times daily. 
 
 
Tablets “Ascorutinum”. Take 1 tablet twice a day. 
 
 
Capsules of Celecoxibum (0,1.). Take 1 capsule 3 times daily. 

Chapter 36.  GENERAL PRESCRIPTION 
569
 
 
Dragee of Aminazinum (0,025). Take 1 dragee 2 times a day. 
 
 
5% solution of Natrii salicylas for internal use. Take 1 tablespoon 3 times a day. 
 
 
4 % solution of Dibazolum as drops for internal use. Take 10 drops 2 times a 
day. 
 
Tincture of Arnica. Take 30 drops 3 times daily. 
 
 
Ampoules each containing 1 ml of 50% solution of. Analginum. Administer IM. 
 
10. Flacons each containing Insulinum in a dose of 5 ml (1 ml – 40 IU). 
Administer SC. 
11.  200 ml of sterile 5% solution of Glucosum for IV infusion. 
 
12.  10 suppositories “Betiolum”. Use 1 suppository rectally 2 times a day. 
 
13.  3% aspersion of Octathionum. For applying on the skin. 
 
14.  5% ointment of Iodoformium. For the treatment of the wound. 
 
15.  0,5% solution of Atropini sulfas as eye drops. Apply 2 drops into each eye. 
 
16.  2% paste of Acidum salicylicum. For applying on the skin. 

570 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
 
SELECTED REFERENCES 
 
 
Basic and Clinical Pharmacology, 12th edition / Ed. B.G. Katzung, S.B. 
Masters, A.J. Trevor – New-York: McGraw-Hill Education Lange, 2010. – 1345 p. 
 
 
Firdaus M. Review of Pharmacology, 7th edition. – Karachi: Riaz Medical 
Publishers, 2007. – 190 p. 
3, Goodman and Gilman"s the Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 13th 
Edition. – McGraw-Hill Education, 2017. – McGraw-Hill Education, 2017. – 1440 p. 
 
 
Laurence D.R., Bennet P.N., Brown M.G. Clinical Pharmacology, 8th edi-
tion. – London: Churchill-Livingstone Elsevier, 1998. –710 p. 
 Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, 4th Edition / Ed.: R.Finkel, 
M.A. Clark, L.X. Cubeddu. – Lippincott Wlliams Wilkins, 2008. – 560 p. 
 
 
Lippincott Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, 5th Edition. – Lippincott 
Wlliams Wilkins, 2011. – 608 p. 
 Lippincott Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, 6th Edition/ Ed. K. Whalen. 
 
– Lippincott Wlliams Wilkins, 2014. – 680 p. 
 
 
Lullman H, Albrcht Z., Klaus M, Detlef B. Color Atlas of 
Pharmacology.– Stuttgart – New-York: Thieme, 2000. – 386 p. 
 
Musil J., Novakova O., Kurz K. Biochemistry in a Schematic 
Perspective. – Prague,1980.– 216 p. 
 
Olson J. Clinical Pharmacology Made Ridiculously Simple. – McGrow-
Hill International Edition, 2000. – 164 p. 
 
Rang H.P., Dale M.M., Ritter J.M., Moore P.K. Rang’s and Dale’s 
Pharmacology, 6th edition. – London: Churchill-Livingstone Elsevier, 2007. – 830 p. 
 
 
Stefanov O., Kucher V. Pharmacology with General Prescription: a text-
book for English-speaking students, 2nd edition. – K.,2007.– 318 p. 
 
Stringer J.L. Basic Concepts in Pharmacology. A students survival guide, 
2nd edition. – McGrow-Hill International Edition, 2001. – 286 p. 
 
Ukrainian edition of Dorland’s Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 29 the edi-
tion. In 2 volumes–Lviv: Nautilus, 2002. –2668 p. 
 
http://www.yandex.ru 
 
 
http://images.yandex.ru 
 
 
http://www.picsearch.com 
 
 
http://images.search.yahoo.com 

Chapter 36.  GENERAL PRESCRIPTION 
571

572 
PHARMACOLOGY. 
V. M. Bobyrov, O. M. Vazhnicha, T. O. Devyatkina, N. M. 
Devyatkina 
 
Навчальне видання 
 
Бобирьов Віктор Миколайович 
 
важнича Олена Митрофанівна 
 
дев’яткіна Тетяна Олексіївна 
 
дев’яткіна Наталія Миколаївна 
 
 
Фармакологія 
 
Підручник (англ. мовою) 
 
Редактор: О. В. Марчук 
 
Коректор: Ю. В. Анвар 
 
Технічний редактор Ж. С. Швець 
 
Комп’ютерна верстка: О. С. Парфенюк 
 
Підписано до друку 19.03.2015. Формат 60 × 84/16.. 
Гарнітура Таймс. Папір офсетний. Друк офсетний. 
 
Ум. друк. арк. 30,33. Тираж 1000 пр. Зам. № 795. 
 
 
“Нова Книга” 
 
 
Вінниця, вул. Квятека, 20 
 
Свідоцтво про внесення суб’єкта видавничої справи 
 
до Державного реєстру видавців, виготівників 
 
 розповсюджувачів видавничої продукції 
ДК №2646 від 11.10.2006 р. 
 
Тел. (0432) 52-34-80, 52-34-82. Факс 52-34-81 E-
mail: newbook1@vinnitsa.com 
www.novaknyha.com.ua 

