Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 1 
 
                   
 
 
 
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 
 
By  
Dr Minakshi Pathak 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 2 
 
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 
The Anatomy and Physiology module introduces the structure and function 
of the human body. You will read about the cells, tissues and membranes 
that make up our bodies and how our major systems function to help us 
develop and stay healthy. 
In this module you will learn to: 
 Describe basic human body functions and life process. 
 Name the major human body systems and relate their functions. 
 Describe the anatomical locations, structures and physiological 
functions of the main components of each major system of the human 
body. 
INTRODUCTION TO THE HUMAN BODY 
Human beings are arguably the most complex organisms on this planet. 
Imagine billions of microscopic parts, each with its own identity, working 
together in an organized manner for the benefit of the total being. The 
human body is a single structure but it is made up of billions of smaller 
structures of four major kinds: 
Cells 
Cells have long been recognized as the simplest units of living matter that 
can maintain life and reproduce themselves. The human body, which is 
made up of numerous cells, begins as a single, newly fertilized cell. 
Tissues 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 3 
 
Tissues are somewhat more complex units than cells. By definition, a tissue 
is an organization of a great many similar cells with varying amounts and 
kinds of nonliving, intercellular substance between them. 
Organs 
Organs are more complex units than tissues. An organ is an organization of 
several different kinds of tissues so arranged that together they can perform 
a special function. For example, the stomach is an organization of muscle, 
connective, epithelial, and nervous tissues. Muscle and connective tissues 
form its wall, epithelial and connective tissues form its lining, and nervous 
tissue extends throughout both its wall and its lining. 
Systems 
Systems are the most complex of the component units of the human body. A 
system is an organization of varying numbers and kinds of organs so 
arranged that together they can perform complex functions for the body. Ten 
major systems compose the human body: 
 Skeletal 
 Muscular 
 Nervous 
 Endocrine 
 Cardiovascular 
 Lymphatic 
 Respiratory 
 Digestive 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 4 
 
 Urinary 
 Reproductive 
  
 
 
 
 
Anatomy is the study of the structure and relationship between body parts. 
Physiology is the study of the function of body parts and the body as a 
whole.  
The structure of an organism or any of its parts. The scientific study of the 
shape and structure of organisms and their parts. Anatomy Definition. The 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 5 
 
structure of an animal or plant; also, the study of this structure through 
techniques such as microscopic observation and dissection. 
Anatomy is the branch of biology concerned with the study of the structure 
of organisms and their parts. In some of its facets, anatomy is related 
to embryology and comparative anatomy, which itself is closely related 
to evolutionary biology and phylogeny. Human anatomy is one of the basic 
essential sciences of medicine.  
The history of anatomy is characterized by a progressive understanding of 
the functions of the organs and structures of the human body. Methods have 
also improved dramatically, advancing from the examination of animals by 
dissection of carcasses and cadavers (corpses) to 20th century medical 
imaging techniques including X-ray, ultrasound, and magnetic resonance 
imaging. 
Anatomy and physiology, which study (respectively) the structure 
and function of organisms and their parts, make a natural pair of related 
disciplines, and they are often studied together. 
Anatomy is the scientific study of the structure of organisms including their 
systems, organs and tissues. It includes the appearance and position of the 
various parts, the materials from which they are composed, their locations 
and their relationships with other parts. Anatomy is quite distinct 
from physiology and biochemistry, which deal respectively with the 
functions of those parts and the chemical processes involved. For example, 
an anatomist is concerned with the shape, size, position, structure, blood 
supply and innervation of an organ such as the liver; while a physiologist is 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 6 
 
interested in the production of bile, the role of the liver in nutrition and the 
regulation of bodily functions 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 7 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anatomical Structure of human body 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 9 
 
 
BODY FUNCTIONS & LIFE PROCESS 
Body Functions 
Body functions are the physiological or psychological functions of body 
systems. The body's functions are ultimately its cells' functions. Survival is 
the body's most important business. Survival depends on the body's 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 10 
 
maintaining or restoring homeostasis, a state of relative constancy, of its 
internal environment. 
More than a century ago, French physiologist, Claude Bernard (1813-1878), 
made a remarkable observation. He noted that body cells survived in a 
healthy condition only when the temperature, pressure, and chemical 
composition of their environment remained relatively constant. Later, an 
American physiologist, Walter B. Cannon (1871-1945), suggested the name 
homeostasis for the relatively constant states maintained by the body. 
Homeostasis is a key word in modern physiology. It comes from two Greek 
words - "homeo," meaning the same, and "stasis," meaning standing. 
"Standing or staying the same" then is the literal meaning of homeostasis. 
However, as Cannon emphasized, homeostasis does not mean something set 
and immobile that stays exactly the same all the time. In his words, 
homeostasis "means a condition that may vary, but which is relatively 
constant." 
Homeostasis depends on the body's ceaselessly carrying on many activities. 
Its major activities or functions are responding to changes in the body's 
environment, exchanging materials between the environment and cells, 
metabolizing foods, and integrating all of the body's diverse activities. 
The body's ability to perform many of its functions changes gradually over 
the years. In general, the body performs its functions least well at both ends 
of life - in infancy and in old age. During childhood, body functions 
gradually become more and more efficient and effective. During late 
maturity and old age the opposite is true. They gradually become less and 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 11 
 
less efficient and effective. During young adulthood, they normally operate 
with maximum efficiency and effectiveness. 
Life Process 
All living organisms have certain characteristics that distinguish them from 
non-living forms. The basic processes of life include organization, 
metabolism, responsiveness, movements, and reproduction. In humans, who 
represent the most complex form of life, there are additional requirements 
such as growth, differentiation, respiration, digestion, and excretion. All of 
these processes are interrelated. No part of the body, from the smallest cell 
to a complete body system, works in isolation. All function together, in fine-
tuned balance, for the well being of the individual and to maintain life. 
Disease such as cancer and death represent a disruption of the balance in 
these processes. 
The following are a brief description of the life process: 
Organization 
At all levels of the organizational scheme, there is a division of labor. Each 
component has its own job to perform in cooperation with others. Even a 
single cell, if it loses its integrity or organization, will die. 
Metabolism 
Metabolism is a broad term that includes all the chemical reactions that 
occur in the body. One phase of metabolism is catabolism in which complex 
substances are broken down into simpler building blocks and energy is 
released. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 12 
 
Responsiveness 
Responsiveness or irritability is concerned with detecting changes in the 
internal or external environments and reacting to that change. It is the act of 
sensing a stimulus and responding to it. 
Movement 
There are many types of movement within the body. On the cellular level, 
molecules move from one place to another. Blood moves from one part of 
the body to another. The diaphragm moves with every breath. The ability of 
muscle fibers to shorten and thus to produce movement is called 
contractility. 
Reproduction 
For most people, reproduction refers to the formation of a new person, the 
birth of a baby. In this way, life is transmitted from one generation to the 
next through reproduction of the organism. In a broader sense, reproduction 
also refers to the formation of new cells for the replacement and repair of old 
cells as well as for growth. This is cellular reproduction. Both are essential 
to the survival of the human race. 
Growth 
Growth refers to an increase in size either through an increase in the number 
of cells or through an increase in the size of each individual cell. In order for 
growth to occur, anabolic processes must occur at a faster rate than catabolic 
processes. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 13 
 
Differentiation 
Differentiation is a developmental process by which unspecialized cells 
change into specialized cells with distinctive structural and functional 
characteristics. Through differentiation, cells develop into tissues and 
organs. 
Respiration 
Respiration refers to all the processes involved in the exchange of oxygen 
and carbon dioxide between the cells and the external environment. It 
includes ventilation, the diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide, and the 
transport of the gases in the blood. Cellular respiration deals with the cell's 
utilization of oxygen and release of carbon dioxide in its metabolism. 
Digestion 
Digestion is the process of breaking down complex ingested foods into 
simple molecules that can be absorbed into the blood and utilized by the 
body. 
Excretion 
Excretion is the process that removes the waste products of digestion and 
metabolism from the body. It gets rid of by-products that the body is unable 
to use, many of which are toxic and incompatible with life. 
The ten life processes described above are not enough to ensure the survival 
of the individual. In addition to these processes, life depends on certain 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 14 
 
physical factors from the environment. These include water, oxygen, 
nutrients, heat, and pressure. 
ANATOMICAL TERMINOLOGY 
Before we get into the following learning units, which will provide more 
detailed discussion of topics on different human body systems, it is 
necessary to learn some useful terms for describing body structure. Knowing 
these terms will make it much easier for us to understand the content of the 
following learning units. Three groups of terms are introduced here: 
 Directional Terms 
 Planes of the Body 
 Body Cavities 
Directional Terms 
Directional terms describe the positions of structures relative to other 
structures or locations in the body. 
Superior or cranial - toward the head end of the body; upper (example, the 
hand is part of the superior extremity). 
Inferior or caudal - away from the head; lower (example, the foot is part of 
the inferior extremity). 
Anterior or ventral - front (example, the kneecap is located on the anterior 
side of the leg). 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 15 
 
Posterior or dorsal - back (example, the shoulder blades are located on the 
posterior side of the body). 
Medial - toward the midline of the body (example, the middle toe is located 
at the medial side of the foot). 
Lateral - away from the midline of the body (example, the little toe is 
located at the lateral side of the foot). 
Proximal - toward or nearest the trunk or the point of origin of a part 
(example, the proximal end of the femur joins with the pelvic bone). 
Distal - away from or farthest from the trunk or the point or origin of a part 
(example, the hand is located at the distal end of the forearm) 
Planes of the Body 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 16 
 
Coronal Plane (Frontal Plane) - A vertical plane running from side to side; 
divides the body or any of its parts into anterior and posterior portions. 
Sagittal Plane (Lateral Plane) - A vertical plane running from front to 
back; divides the body or any of its parts into right and left sides. 
Axial Plane (Transverse Plane) - A horizontal plane; divides the body or 
any of its parts into upper and lower parts. 
Median plane - Sagittal plane through the midline of the body; divides the 
body or any of its parts into right and left halves. 
Body Cavaties 
The cavities, or spaces, of the body contain the internal organs, or viscera. 
The two main cavities are called the ventral and dorsal cavities. The ventral 
is the larger cavity and is subdivided into two parts (thoracic and 
abdominopelvic cavities) by the diaphragm, a dome-shaped respiratory 
muscle. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 17 
 
Thoracic cavity 
The upper ventral, thoracic, or chest cavity contains the heart, lungs, trachea, 
esophagus, large blood vessels, and nerves. The thoracic cavity is bound 
laterally by the ribs (covered by costal pleura) and the diaphragm caudally 
(covered by diaphragmatic pleura). 
Abdominal and pelvic cavity 
The lower part of the ventral (abdominopelvic) cavity can be further divided 
into two portions: abdominal portion and pelvic portion. The abdominal 
cavity contains most of the gastrointestinal tract as well as the kidneys and 
adrenal glands. The abdominal cavity is bound cranially by the diaphragm, 
laterally by the body wall, and caudally by the pelvic cavity. The pelvic 
cavity contains most of the urogenital system as well as the rectum. The 
pelvic cavity is bounded cranially by the abdominal cavity, dorsally by the 
sacrum, and laterally by the pelvis. 
Dorsal cavity 
The smaller of the two main cavities is called the dorsal cavity. As its name 
implies, it contains organs lying more posterior in the body. The dorsal 
cavity, again, can be divided into two portions. The upper portion, or the 
cranial cavity, houses the brain, and the lower portion, or vertebral canal 
houses the spinal cord. 
Here is what we have learned from Introduction to the Human Body: 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 18 
 
 The human body is a single structure but it is made up of billions of 
smaller structures of four major kinds: cells, tissues, organs, and 
systems. 
 An organ is an organization of several different kinds of tissues so 
arranged that together they can perform a special function. 
 A system is an organization of varying numbers and kinds of organs 
so arranged that together they can perform complex functions for the 
body. 
 Ten major systems include the skeletal, muscular, nervous, endocrine, 
cardiovascular, lymphatic, respiratory, digestive, urinary, and the 
reproductive system. 
 Body functions are the physiological or psychological functions of 
body systems. Survival of the body depends on the body's maintaining 
or restoring homeostasis, a state of relative constancy, of its internal 
environment. 
 Human 
life 
process 
includes 
organization, 
metabolism, 
responsiveness, movements, reproduction, growth, differentiation, 
respiration, digestion, and excretion. All these processes work 
together, in fine-tuned balance, for the well-being of the individual 
and to maintain life. 
 Life depends on certain physical factors from the environment, which 
include water, oxygen, nutrients, heat, and pressure. 
 Useful terms for describing body parts and activities include: 
o Directional terms 
o Terms describing planes of the body 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 19 
 
o Terms describing body cavities 
Cell 
 
The cell (from Latin cella, meaning "small room") is the basic structural, 
functional, and biological unit of all known living organisms.Cells is the 
smallest unit of life that can replicate independently, and are often called the 
"building blocks of life". 
Cells, the smallest structures capable of maintaining life and reproducing, 
compose all living things, from single-celled plants to multibillion-celled 
animals. The human body, which is made up of numerous cells, begins as a 
single, newly fertilized cell. 
Almost all human cells are microscopic in size. To give you an idea how 
small a cell is, one average-sized adult body, according to one estimate, 
consists of 100 trillion cells 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 20 
 
 
 
Two-thirds of a cell is water, which means that two-thirds of your whole 
body 
is water. The 
rest is a mixture 
of 
molecules, mainly 
proteins, lipids and carbohydrates. Your cells turn the raw materials in the 
food you eat into the molecules your body needs, using thousands of 
different chemical reactions. 
The nucleus is surrounded by a membrane called the nuclear envelope, 
which protects the DNA and separates the nucleus from the rest of the cell. 
Plasma membrane (illustration) the plasma membrane is the outer lining of 
the cell. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 21 
 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 22 
 
The cell (from Latin cella, meaning "small room") is the basic structural, 
functional, and biological unit of all known living organisms. Cells are the 
smallest unit of life that can replicate independently, and are often called the 
"building blocks of life". The study of cells is called cell biology. 
Cells consist of cytoplasm enclosed within a membrane, which contains 
many bimolecular such as proteins and nucleic acids. Organisms can be 
classified as unicellular (consisting of a single cell; including bacteria) 
or multi cellular (including plants and animals). While the number of cells in 
plants and animals varies from species to species, humans contain more than 
10 trillion cells. Most plant and animal cells are visible only under the 
microscope, with dimensions between 1 and 100 micrometres.  
The cell was discovered by Robert Hooke in 1665, who named the 
biological unit for its resemblance to cells inhabited by Christian monks in a 
monastery. Cell theory, first developed in 1839 by Matthias Jakob 
Schleiden and Theodor Schwann, states that all organisms are composed of 
one or more cells, that cells are the fundamental unit of structure and 
function in all living organisms, that all cells come from preexisting cells, 
and that all cells contain the hereditary information necessary for regulating 
cell functions and for transmitting information to the next generation of 
cells. Cells emerged on Earth at least 3.5 billion years ago.  
Cells are considered the basic units of life in part because they come in 
discrete and easily recognizable packages. That's because all cells are 
surrounded by a structure called the cell membrane — which, much like the 
walls of a house, serves as a clear boundary between the cell's internal and 
external environments. The cell membrane is sometimes also referred to as 
the plasma membrane. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 23 
 
 
Cell membranes are based on a framework of fat-based molecules called 
phospholipids, which physically prevent water-loving, or hydrophilic, 
substances from entering or escaping the cell. These membranes are also 
studded with proteins that serve various functions. Some of these proteins 
act as gatekeepers, determining what substances can and cannot cross the 
membrane. Others function as markers, identifying the cell as part of the 
same organism or as foreign. Still others work like fasteners, binding cells 
together so they can function as a unit. Yet other membrane proteins serve as 
communicators, sending and receiving signals from neighboring cells and 
the environment — whether friendly or alarming 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 24 
 
 
 
Cells are the smallest common denominator of life. Some cells are 
organisms unto themselves; others are part of multicellular organisms. All 
cells are made from the same major classes of organic molecules: nucleic 
acids, proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids. In addition, cells can be placed in 
two major categories as a result of ancient evolutionary events: prokaryotes, 
with their cytoplasmic genomes, and eukaryotes, with their nuclear-encased 
genomes and other membrane-bound organelles. Though they are small, 
cells have evolved into a vast variety of shapes and sizes. Together they 
form tissues that themselves form organs, and eventually entire organisms 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 25 
 
 
 
Cells are of two types, eukaryotic, which contain a nucleus, and prokaryotic, 
which do not. Prokaryotes are single-celled organisms, while eukaryotes can 
be either single-celled or multicellular. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 26 
 
 
 
Prokaryotic cells 
Prokaryotic cells were the first form of life on Earth, characterized by having 
vital biological processes including cell signaling and being self-sustaining. 
They are simpler and smaller than eukaryotic cells, and lack membrane-
bound organelles such as the nucleus. Prokaryotes include two of 
the domains of life, bacteria and archaea. The DNA of a prokaryotic cell 
consists of a single chromosome that is in direct contact with the cytoplasm. 
The 
nuclear 
region 
in 
the 
cytoplasm 
is 
called 
the nucleoid. 
Most prokaryotes are the smallest of all organisms ranging from 0.5 to 
2.0 µm in diameter.  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 27 
 
 
A prokaryotic cell has three architectural regions: 
 Enclosing the cell is the cell envelope – generally consisting of a plasma 
membrane covered by a cell wall which, for some bacteria, may be 
further covered by a third layer called a capsule. Though most 
prokaryotes have both a cell membrane and a cell wall, there are 
exceptions such as Mycoplasma (bacteria) and Thermoplasma (archaea) 
which only possess the cell membrane layer. The envelope gives rigidity 
to the cell and separates the interior of the cell from its environment, 
serving as a protective filter. The cell wall consists of peptidoglycan in 
bacteria, and acts as an additional barrier against exterior forces. It also 
prevents the cell from expanding and bursting (cytolysis) from osmotic 
pressure due to a hypotonic environment. Some eukaryotic cells (plant 
cells and fungal cells) also have a cell wall. 
 Inside the cell is the cytoplasmic region that contains the genome (DNA), 
ribosome and various sorts of inclusions. The genetic material is freely 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 28 
 
found in the cytoplasm. Prokaryotes can carry extra chromosomal 
DNA elements called plasmids, which are usually circular. Linear 
bacterial 
plasmids 
have 
been 
identified 
in 
several 
species 
of spirochetebacteria, 
including 
members 
of 
the 
genus Borrelia notably Borrelia 
burgdorferi, 
which 
causes 
Lyme 
disease.[13] Though not forming a nucleus, the DNA is condensed in 
a nucleoid. Plasmids encode additional genes, such as antibiotic 
resistance genes. 
 On the outside, flagella and pili project from the cell's surface. These are 
structures (not present in all prokaryotes) made of proteins that facilitate 
movement and communication between cells. 
 
Eukaryotic cells 
Plants, animals, fungi, slime moulds, protozoa, and algae are all eukaryotic. 
These cells are about fifteen times wider than a typical prokaryote and can 
be as much as a thousand times greater in volume. The main distinguishing 
feature 
of 
eukaryotes 
as 
compared 
to 
prokaryotes 
is compartmentalization: the 
presence 
of 
membrane-
bound organelles (compartments) in which specific metabolic activities take 
place. Most important among these is a cell nucleus, an organelle that houses 
the cell's DNA. This nucleus gives the eukaryote its name, which means 
"true kernel (nucleus)". Other differences include: 
 The plasma membrane resembles that of prokaryotes in function, with 
minor differences in the setup. Cell walls may or may not be present. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 29 
 
 The eukaryotic DNA is organized in one or more linear molecules, 
called chromosomes, which are associated with histoneproteins. All 
chromosomal DNA is stored in the cell nucleus, separated from the 
cytoplasm by a membrane. Some eukaryotic organelles such 
as mitochondria also contain some DNA. 
 Many eukaryotic cells are ciliated with primary cilia. Primary cilia play 
important roles in chemosensation,mechanosensation, and thermo 
sensation. Cilia may thus be "viewed as a sensory cellular antennae that 
coordinates a large number of cellular signaling pathways, sometimes 
coupling the signaling to ciliary motility or alternatively to cell division 
and differentiation."  
 Motile cells of eukaryotes can move using motile cilia or flagella. Motile 
cells are absent in conifers and flowering plants. Eukaryotic flagella are 
less complex than those of prokaryotes. 
All cells, whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic, have a membrane that envelops 
the cell, regulates what moves in and out (selectively permeable), and 
maintains the electric potential of the cell. Inside the membrane, 
the cytoplasm takes up most of the cell's volume. All cells (except red blood 
cells which lack a cell nucleus and most organelles to accommodate 
maximum space for hemoglobin) possess DNA, the hereditary material 
of genes, and RNA, containing the information necessary to build 
various proteins such as enzymes, the cell's primary machinery. There are 
also other kinds of bimolecular in cells. This article lists these primary 
components of the cell, then briefly describes their function. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 30 
 
 
 
 
 Membrane 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 31 
 
The cell membrane, or plasma membrane, is a biological membrane that 
surrounds the cytoplasm of a cell. In animals, the plasma membrane is the 
outer boundary of the cell, while in plants and prokaryotes it is usually 
covered by a cell wall. This membrane serves to separate and protect a cell 
from its surrounding environment and is made mostly from a double layer of 
phospholipids, 
which 
are 
amphiphilic (partly hydrophobic and 
partly hydrophilic). Hence, the layer is called a phospholipids bilayer, or 
sometimes a fluid mosaic membrane. Embedded within this membrane is a 
variety of protein molecules that act as channels and pumps that move 
different molecules into and out of the cell. The membrane is said to be 
'semi-permeable', in that it can either let a substance (molecule or ion) pass 
through freely, pass through to a limited extent or not pass through at all. 
Cell surface membranes also contain receptor proteins that allow cells to 
detect external signaling molecules such as hormones. 
 
Genetic material 
Two different kinds of genetic material exist: deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) 
and ribonucleic acid (RNA). Cells use DNA for their long-term information 
storage. The biological information contained in an organism is encoded in 
its DNA sequence. RNA is used for information transport (e.g., mRNA) 
and enzymatic functions 
(e.g., ribosomal RNA). Transfer 
RNA (tRNA) 
molecules are used to add amino acids during protein translation. 
Prokaryotic genetic material is organized in a simple circular DNA molecule 
(the bacterial chromosome) in the nucleoid region of the cytoplasm. 
Eukaryotic genetic material is divided into different, linear molecules 
called chromosomes inside a discrete nucleus, usually with additional 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 32 
 
genetic 
material 
in 
some 
organelles 
like mitochondria andchloroplasts (see endosymbiotic theory). 
A human cell has genetic material contained in the cell nucleus (the nuclear 
genome) and in the mitochondria (the mitochondrial genome). In humans the 
nuclear 
genome 
is 
divided 
into 
46 
linear 
DNA 
molecules 
called chromosomes, including 22 homologous chromosome pairs and a pair 
of sex chromosomes. The mitochondrial genome is a circular DNA molecule 
distinct from the nuclear DNA. Although the mitochondrial DNA is very 
small compared to nuclear chromosomes, it codes for 13 proteins involved 
in mitochondrial energy production and specific RNAs. 
Foreign genetic material (most commonly DNA) can also be artificially 
introduced into the cell by a process called transfection. This can be 
transient, if the DNA is not inserted into the cell's genome, or stable, if it is. 
Certain viruses also insert their genetic material into the genome. 
 
 
Cells, the smallest structures capable of maintaining life and reproducing, 
compose all living things, from single-celled plants to multibillion-celled 
animals. The human body, which is made up of numerous cells, begins as a 
single, newly fertilized cell. 
Almost all human cells are microscopic in size. To give you an idea how 
small a cell is, one average-sized adult body, according to one estimate, 
consists of 100 trillion cells! 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 33 
 
CELL FUNCTION 
The structural and functional characteristics of different types of cells are 
determined by the nature of the proteins present. Cells of various types have 
different functions because cell structure and function are closely related. It 
is apparent that a cell that is very thin is not well suited for a protective 
function. Bone cells do not have an appropriate structure for nerve impulse 
conduction. Just as there are many cell types, there are varied cell functions. 
The generalized cell functions include movement of substances across the 
cell membrane, cell division to make new cells, and protein synthesis. 
Movement of substances across the cell membrane 
The survival of the cell depends on maintaining the difference between 
extracellular and intracellular material. Mechanisms of movement across the 
cell membrane include simple diffusion, osmosis, filtration, active 
transport, endocytosis, andexocytosis. 
Simple diffusion is the movement of particles (solutes) from a region of 
higher solute concentration to a region of lower solute concentration. 
Osmosis is the diffusion of solvent or water molecules through a selectively 
permeable membrane. Filtration utilizes pressure to push substances through 
a membrane. Active transport moves substances against a concentration 
gradient from a region of lower concentration to a region of higher 
concentration. It requires a carrier molecule and uses energy. Endocytosis 
refers to the formation of vesicles to transfer particles and droplets from 
outside to inside the cell. Secretory vesicles are moved from the inside to the 
outside of the cell by exocytosis. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 34 
 
Cell division 
 
Cell division is the process by which new cells are formed for growth, 
repair, and replacement in the body. This process includes division of the 
nuclear material and division of the cytoplasm. All cells in the body (somatic 
cells), except those that give rise to the eggs and sperm (gametes), reproduce 
by mitosis. Egg and sperm cells are produced by a special type of nuclear 
division called meiosis in which the number of chromosomes is halved. 
Division of the cytoplasm is called cytokinesis. 
Somatic cells reproduce by mitosis, which results in two cells identical to the 
one parent cell. Interphase is the period between successive cell divisions. It 
is the longest part of the cell cycle. The successive stages of mitosis are 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 35 
 
prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. Cytokinesis, division of the 
cytoplasm, occurs during telophase. 
Meiosis is a special type of cell division that occurs in the production of the 
gametes, or eggs and sperm. These cells have only 23 chromosomes, one-
half the number found in somatic cells, so that when fertilization takes place 
the resulting cell will again have 46 chromosomes, 23 from the egg and 23 
from the sperm. 
DNA replication and protein synthesis 
Proteins that are synthesized in the cytoplasm function as structural 
materials, enzymes that regulate chemical reactions, hormones, and other 
vital substances. DNA in the nucleus directs protein synthesis in the 
cytoplasm. A gene is the portion of a DNA molecule that controls the 
synthesis of one specific protein molecule. Messenger RNA carries the 
genetic information from the DNA in the nucleus to the sites of protein 
synthesis in the cytoplasm. 
There are many different types, sizes, and shapes of cells in the body. For 
descriptive purposes, the concept of a "generalized cell" is introduced. It 
includes features from all cell types. A cell consists of three parts: the cell 
membrane, the nucleus, and, between the two, the cytoplasm. Within the 
cytoplasm lie intricate arrangements of fine fibers and hundreds or even 
thousands of miniscule but distinct structures called organelles. 
Cell membrane 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 36 
 
Every cell in the body is enclosed by a cell (Plasma) membrane. The cell 
membrane separates the material outside the cell, extracellular, from the 
material inside the cell, intracellular. It maintains the integrity of a cell and 
controls passage of materials into and out of the cell. All materials within a 
cell must have access to the cell membrane (the cell's boundary) for the 
needed exchange. 
The cell membrane is a double layer of phospholipid molecules. Proteins in 
the cell membrane provide structural support, form channels for passage of 
materials, act as receptor sites, function as carrier molecules, and provide 
identification markers. 
Nucleus and Nucleolus 
The nucleus, formed by a nuclear membrane around a fluid nucleoplasm, is 
the control center of the cell. Threads of chromatin in the nucleus contain 
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), the genetic material of the cell. The nucleolus 
is a dense region of ribonucleic acid (RNA) in the nucleus and is the site of 
ribosome formation. The nucleus determines how the cell will function, as 
well as the basic structure of that cell. 
Cytoplasm 
The cytoplasm is the gel-like fluid inside the cell. It is the medium for 
chemical reaction. It provides a platform upon which other organelles can 
operate within the cell. All of the functions for cell expansion, growth and 
replication are carried out in the cytoplasm of a cell. Within the cytoplasm, 
materials move by diffusion, a physical process that can work only for short 
distances. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 37 
 
Cytoplasmic organelles 
Cytoplasmic organelles are "little organs" that are suspended in the 
cytoplasm of the cell. Each type of organelle has a definite structure and a 
specific role in the function of the cell. Examples of cytoplasmic organelles 
are mitochondrion, ribosomes,endoplasmic 
reticulum, golgi 
apparatus, 
and lysosomes. 
Organelles 
Organelles are parts of the cell which are adapted and/or specialized for 
carrying out one or more vital functions, analogous to the organs of the 
human body (such as the heart, lung, and kidney, with each organ 
performing a different function). Both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells have 
organelles, but prokaryotic organelles are generally simpler and are not 
membrane-bound. 
 
There are several types of organelles in a cell. Some (such as 
the nucleus and golgi apparatus) are typically solitary, while others (such 
as mitochondria, chloroplasts,peroxisomes and lysosomes) can be numerous 
(hundreds to thousands). The cytosol is the gelatinous fluid that fills the cell 
and surrounds the organelles. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 38 
 
 
 
Eukaryotic 
 Cell nucleus: A cell's information center, the cell nucleus is the most 
conspicuous organelle found in a eukaryotic cell. It houses the 
cell's chromosomes, and is the place where almost all DNA replication 
and RNA synthesis (transcription) occur. The nucleus is spherical and 
separated from the cytoplasm by a double membrane called the nuclear 
envelope. The nuclear envelope isolates and protects a cell's DNA from 
various molecules that could accidentally damage its structure or 
interfere with its processing. During processing, DNA is transcribed, or 
copied into a special RNA, called messenger RNA (mRNA). This 
mRNA is then transported out of the nucleus, where it is translated into a 
specific protein molecule. The nucleolus is a specialized region within 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 39 
 
the nucleus where ribosome subunits are assembled. In prokaryotes, 
DNA processing takes place in the cytoplasm. 
 Mitochondria 
and 
Chloroplasts: 
generate 
energy 
for 
the 
cell. Mitochondria are self-replicating organelles that occur in various 
numbers, shapes, and sizes in the cytoplasm of all eukaryotic 
cells. Respiration occurs in the cell mitochondria, which generate the 
cell's energy by oxidative phosphorylation, using oxygen to release 
energy stored in cellular nutrients (typically pertaining to glucose) to 
generate ATP. Mitochondria multiply by binary fission, like prokaryotes. 
Chloroplasts can only be found in plants and algae, and they capture the 
sun's energy to make carbohydrates through photosynthesis. 
 Endoplasmic reticulum: The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a transport 
network for molecules targeted for certain modifications and specific 
destinations, as compared to molecules that float freely in the cytoplasm. 
The ER has two forms: the rough ER, which has ribosomes on its surface 
that secrete proteins into the ER, and the smooth ER, which lacks 
ribosomes. The smooth ER plays a role in calcium sequestration and 
release. 
 Golgi apparatus: The primary function of the Golgi apparatus is to 
process and package the macromolecules such as proteins andlipids that 
are synthesized by the cell. 
 Lysosomes 
and 
Peroxisomes: Lysosomes contain digestive 
enzymes (acid hydrolases). They digest excess or worn-outorganelles, 
food 
particles, 
and 
engulfed viruses or bacteria. Peroxisomes have 
enzymes that rid the cell of toxic peroxides. The cell could not house 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 40 
 
these destructive enzymes if they were not contained in a membrane-
bound system. 
 Centrosome: the cytoskeleton organiser: The centrosome produces 
the microtubules of a cell – a key component of thecytoskeleton. It 
directs 
the 
transport 
through 
the ER and 
the Golgi 
apparatus. 
Centrosomes are composed of two centrioles, which separate during cell 
division and help in the formation of the mitotic spindle. A single 
centrosome is present in the animal cells. They are also found in some 
fungi and algae cells. 
 Vacuoles: Vacuoles sequester waste products and in plant cells store 
water. They are often described as liquid filled space and are surrounded 
by a membrane. Some cells, most notably Amoeba, have contractile 
vacuoles, which can pump water out of the cell if there is too much 
water. The vacuoles of plant cells and fungal cells are usually larger than 
those of animal cells. 
Eukaryotic and prokaryotic 
 Ribosomes: 
The ribosome is 
a 
large 
complex 
of RNA and protein molecules. They each consist of two subunits, and 
act as an assembly line where RNA from the nucleus is used to 
synthesise proteins from amino acids. Ribosomes can be found either 
floating freely or bound to a membrane (the rough endoplasmatic 
reticulum in eukaryotes, or the cell membrane in prokaryotes).  
 
TISSUES 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 41 
 
BODY TISSUES 
Tissue is a group of cells that have similar structure and that function 
together as a unit. A nonliving material, called the intercellular matrix, fills 
the spaces between the cells. This may be abundant in some tissues and 
minimal in others. The intercellular matrix may contain special substances 
such as salts and fibers that are unique to a specific tissue and gives that 
tissue distinctive characteristics. There are four main tissue types in the 
body: epithelial, connective, muscle, and nervous. Each is designed for 
specific functions. 
 
 
EPITHELIAL TISSUE 
Epithelial tissues are widespread throughout the body. They form the 
covering of all body surfaces, line body cavities and hollow organs, and are 
the major tissue in glands. They perform a variety of functions that include 
protection, secretion, absorption, excretion, filtration, diffusion, and sensory 
reception. 
The cells in epithelial tissue are tightly packed together with very little 
intercellular matrix. Because the tissues form coverings and linings, the cells 
have one free surface that is not in contact with other cells. Opposite the free 
surface, the cells are attached to underlying connective tissue by a non-
cellular 
basement 
membrane. 
This 
membrane 
is 
a 
mixture 
of carbohydrates and proteins secreted by the epithelial and connective 
tissue cells. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 42 
 
Epithelial cells may be squamous, cuboidal, or columnar in shape and may 
be arranged in single or multiple layers. 
 
Simple cuboidal epithelium is found in glandular tissue and in the kidney 
tubules. Simple columnar epithelium lines the stomach and intestines. 
Pseudostratified columnar epithelium lines portions of the respiratory tract 
and some of the tubes of the male reproductive tract. Transitional epithelium 
can be distended or stretched. Glandular epithelium is specialized to produce 
and secrete substances. 
CONNECTIVE TISSUE 
Connective tissues bind structures together, form a framework and support 
for organs and the body as a whole, store fat, transport substances, protect 
against disease, and help repair tissue damage. They occur throughout the 
body. Connective tissues are characterized by an abundance of intercellular 
matrix with relatively few cells. Connective tissue cells are able to reproduce 
but not as rapidly as epithelial cells. Most connective tissues have a good 
blood supply but some do not. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 43 
 
 
Numerous cell types are found in connective tissue. Three of the most 
common are the fibroblast, macrophage, and mast cell. The types of 
connective tissue include loose connective tissue, adipose tissue, dense 
fibrous connective tissue, elastic connective tissue, cartilage, osseous tissue 
(bone), and blood. 
 
MUSCLE TISSUE 
Muscle tissue is composed of cells that have the special ability to shorten or 
contract in order to produce movement of the body parts. The tissue is 
highly cellular and is well supplied with blood vessels. The cells are long 
and slender so they are sometimes called muscle fibers, and these are usually 
arranged in bundles or layers that are surrounded by connective tissue. Actin 
and myosin are contractile proteins in muscle tissue. 
Muscle tissue can be categorized into skeletal muscle tissue, smooth muscle 
tissue, and cardiac muscle tissue. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 44 
 
 
Skeletal muscle fibers are cylindrical, multinucleated, striated, and under 
voluntary control. Smooth muscle cells are spindle shaped, have a single, 
centrally located nucleus, and lack striations. They are called involuntary 
muscles. Cardiac muscle has branching fibers, one nucleus per cell, 
striations, and intercalated disks. Its contraction is not under voluntary 
control. 
NERVOUS TISSUE 
Nervous tissue is found in the brain, spinal cord, and nerves. It is responsible 
for coordinating and controlling many body activities. It stimulates muscle 
contraction, creates an awareness of the environment, and plays a major role 
in emotions, memory, and reasoning. To do all these things, cells in nervous 
tissue need to be able to communicate with each other by way of electrical 
nerve impulses. The cells in nervous tissue that generate and conduct 
impulses are called neurons or nerve cells. These cells have three principal 
parts: the dendrites, the cell body, and one axon. The main part of the cell, 
the part that carries on the general functions, is the cell body. Dendrites are 
extensions, or processes, of the cytoplasm that carry impulses to the cell 
body. An extension or process called an axon carries impulses away from 
the cell body. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 45 
 
Nervous tissue also includes cells that do not transmit impulses, but instead 
support the activities of the neurons. These are the glial cells (neuroglial 
cells), together termed the neuroglia. Supporting, or glia, cells bind neurons 
together and insulate the neurons. Some are phagocytic and protect against 
bacterial invasion, while others provide nutrients by binding blood vessels to 
the neurons. 
MEMBRANES 
Body membranes are thin sheets of tissue that cover the body, line body 
cavities, and cover organs within the cavities in hollow organs. They can be 
categorized into epithelial and connective tissue membrane. 
Epithelial Membranes 
Epithelial membranes consist of epithelial tissue and the connective tissue to 
which it is attached. The two main types of epithelial membranes are the 
mucous membranes and serous membranes. 
Mucous Membranes 
Mucous membranes are epithelial membranes that consist of epithelial tissue 
that is attached to an underlying loose connective tissue. These membranes, 
sometimes called mucosae, line the body cavities that open to the outside. 
The entire digestive tract is lined with mucous membranes. Other examples 
include the respiratory, excretory, and reproductive tracts. 
Serous Membranes 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 46 
 
Serous membranes line body cavities that do not open directly to the outside, 
and they cover the organs located in those cavities. Serous membranes are 
covered by a thin layer of serous fluid that is secreted by the epithelium. 
Serous fluid lubricates the membrane and reduces friction and abrasion 
when organs in the thoracic or abdomen pelvic cavity move against each 
other or the cavity wall. Serous membranes have special names given 
according to their location. For example, the serous membrane that lines the 
thoracic cavity and covers the lungs is called pleura. 
Connective Tissue Membranes 
Connective tissue membranes contain only connective tissue. Synovial 
membranes and meninges belong to this category. 
Synovial Membranes 
Synovial membranes are connective tissue membranes that line the cavities 
of the freely movable joints such as the shoulder, elbow, and knee. Like 
serous membranes, they line cavities that do not open to the outside. Unlike 
serous membranes, they do not have a layer of epithelium. Synovial 
membranes secrete synovial fluid into the joint cavity, and this lubricates the 
cartilage on the ends of the bones so that they can move freely and without 
friction. 
Meninges 
The connective tissue covering on the brain and spinal cord, within the 
dorsal cavity, are called meninges. They provide protection for these vital 
structures. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 47 
 
 
 
 
Skeletal System Anatomy 
 
The skeletal system includes all of the bones and joints in the body. Each 
bone is a complex living organ that is made up of many cells, protein fibers, 
and minerals. The skeleton acts as a scaffold by providing support and 
protection for the soft tissues that make up the rest of the body. The skeletal 
system also provides attachment points for muscles to allow movements at 
the joints. New blood cells are produced by the red bone marrow inside of 
our bones. New blood cells are produced by the red bone marrow inside of 
our bones. Bones act as the body‘s warehouse for calcium, iron, and energy 
in the form of fat. Finally, the skeleton grows throughout childhood and 
provides a framework for the rest of the body to grow along with it. 
 
The skeletal system in an adult body is made up of 206 individual bones. 
These bones are arranged into two major divisions: the axial skeleton and 
the appendicular skeleton. The axial skeleton runs along the body‘s midline 
axis and is made up of 80 bones in the following regions: 
 Skull 
 Hyoid 
 Auditory ossicles 
 Ribs 
 Sternum 
 Vertebral column 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 48 
 
 
The appendicle skeleton is made up of 126 bones in the following regions: 
 Upper limbs 
 Lower limbs 
 Pelvic girdle 
 Pectoral (shoulder) girdle 
 
Skull 
The skull is composed of 22 bones that are fused together except for the 
mandible. These 21 fused bones are separate in children to allow the skull 
and brain to grow, but fuse to give added strength and protection as an adult. 
The mandible remains as a movable jaw bone and forms the only movable 
joint in the skull with the temporal bone. 
The bones of the superior portion of the skull are known as the cranium and 
protect the brain from damage. The bones of the inferior and anterior portion 
of the skull are known as facial bones and support the eyes, nose, and mouth. 
Hyoid and Auditory Ossicles 
 
The hyoid is a small, U-shaped bone found just inferior to the mandible. The 
hyoid is the only bone in the body that does not form a joint with any other 
bone—it is a floating bone. The hyoid‘s function is to help hold 
the trachea open and to form a bony connection for the tongue muscles. 
The malleus, incus, and stapes—known collectively as the auditory 
ossicles—are the smallest bones in the body. Found in a small cavity inside 
of the temporal bone, they serve to transmit and amplify sound from the 
eardrum to the inner ear. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 49 
 
 
Vertebrae 
Twenty-six vertebrae form the vertebral column of the human body. They 
are named by region: 
 Cervical (neck) - 7 vertebrae 
 Thoracic (chest) - 12 vertebrae 
 Lumbar (lower back) - 5 vertebrae 
 Sacrum - 1 vertebra 
 Coccyx (tailbone) - 1 vertebra 
With the exception of the singular sacrum and coccyx, each vertebra is 
named for the first letter of its region and its position along the superior-
inferior axis. For example, the most superior thoracic vertebra is called T1 
and the most inferior is called T12. 
Ribs and Sternum 
 
The sternum, or breastbone, is a thin, knife-shaped bone located along the 
midline of the anterior side of the thoracic region of the skeleton. The 
sternum connects to the ribs by thin bands of cartilage called the costal 
cartilage. 
There are 12 pairs of ribs that together with the sternum form the ribcage of 
the thoracic region. The first seven ribs are known as ―true ribs‖ because 
they connect the thoracic vertebrae directly to the sternum through their own 
band of costal cartilage. Ribs 8, 9, and 10 all connect to the sternum through 
cartilage that is connected to the cartilage of the seventh rib, so we consider 
these to be ―false ribs.‖ Ribs 11 and 12 are also false ribs, but are also 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 50 
 
considered to be ―floating ribs‖ because they do not have any cartilage 
attachment to the sternum at all. 
 
Pectoral Girdle and Upper Limb 
 
The pectoral girdle connects the upper limb (arm) bones to the axial 
skeleton and consists of the left and right clavicles and left and right 
scapulae. 
The humerus is the bone of the upper arm. It forms the ball and socket joint 
of the shoulder with the scapula and forms the elbow joint with the lower 
arm bones. The radius and ulna are the two bones of the forearm. The ulna is 
on the medial side of the forearm and forms a hinge joint with the humerus 
at the elbow. The radius allows the forearm and hand to turn over at the 
wrist joint. 
The lower arm bones form the wrist joint with the carpals, a group of eight 
small bones that give added flexibility to the wrist. The carpals are 
connected to the five metacarpals that form the bones of the hand and 
connect to each of the fingers. Each finger has three bones known as 
phalanges, except for the thumb, which only has two phalanges. 
 
Pelvic Girdle and Lower Limb 
 
Formed by the left and right hip bones, the pelvic girdle connects the lower 
limb (leg) bones to the axial skeleton. 
The femur is the largest bone in the body and the only bone of the thigh 
(femoral) region. The femur forms the ball and socket hip joint with the hip 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 51 
 
bone and forms theknee joint with the tibia and patella. Commonly called 
the kneecap, the patella is special because it is one of the few bones that are 
not present at birth. The patella forms in early childhood to support the knee 
for walking and crawling. 
The tibia and fibula are the bones of the lower leg. The tibia is much larger 
than the fibula and bears almost all of the body‘s weight. The fibula is 
mainly a muscle attachment point and is used to help maintain balance. The 
tibia and fibula form the ankle joint with the talus, one of the seven tarsal 
bones in the foot. 
The tarsals are a group of seven small bones that form the posterior end of 
the foot and heel. The tarsals form joints with the five long metatarsals of the 
foot. Then each of the metatarsals forms a joint with one of the set of 
phalanges in the toes. Each toe has three phalanges, except for the big toe, 
which only has two phalanges. 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SKELETAL SYSTEM 
Humans are vertebrates, animals having a vertabral column or backbone. 
They rely on a sturdy internal frame that is centered on a prominent spine. 
The human skeletal system consists of bones, cartilage, ligaments and 
tendons and accounts for about 20 percent of the body weight. 
The living bones in our bodies use oxygen and give off waste products in 
metabolism. They contain active tissues that consume nutrients, require a 
blood supply and change shape or remodel in response to variations in 
mechanical stress. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 52 
 
Bones provide a rigid framework, known as the skeleton, that support and 
protect the soft organs of the body. 
The skeleton supports the body against the pull of gravity. The large bones 
of the lower limbs support the trunk when standing. 
The skeleton also protects the soft body parts. The fused bones of the 
cranium surround the brain to make it less vulnerable to injury. Vertebrae 
surround and protect the spinal cord and bones of the rib cage help protect 
the heart and lungs of the thorax. 
Bones work together with muscles as simple mechanical lever systems to 
produce body movement. 
Bones contain more calcium than any other organ. The intercellular matrix 
of bone contains large amounts of calcium salts, the most important being 
calcium phosphate. 
When blood calcium levels decrease below normal, calcium is released from 
the bones so that there will be an adequate supply for metabolic needs. 
When blood calcium levels are increased, the excess calcium is stored in the 
bone matrix. The dynamic process of releasing and storing calcium goes on 
almost continuously. 
Hematopoiesis, the formation of blood cells, mostly takes place in the red 
marrow of the bones. 
In infants, red marrow is found in the bone cavities. With age, it is largely 
replaced by yellow marrow for fat storage. In adults, red marrow is limited 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 53 
 
to the spongy bone in the skull, ribs, sternum, clavicles, vertebrae and pelvis. 
Red marrow functions in the formation of red blood cells, white blood cells 
and blood platelets. 
STRUCTURE OF BONE TISSUE 
There are two types of bone tissue: compact and spongy. The names imply 
that the two types differ in density, or how tightly the tissue is packed 
together. There are three types of cells that contribute to bone homeostasis. 
Osteoblasts are bone-forming cell, osteoclasts resorb or break down bone, 
and osteocytes are mature bone cells. An equilibrium between osteoblasts 
and osteoclasts maintains bone tissue. 
Compact Bone 
Compact bone consists of closely packed osteons or haversian systems. The 
osteon consists of a central canal called the osteonic (haversian) canal, 
which is surrounded by concentric rings (lamellae) of matrix. Between the 
rings of matrix, the bone cells (osteocytes) are located in spaces called 
lacunae. Small channels (canaliculi) radiate from the lacunae to the osteonic 
(haversian) canal to provide passageways through the hard matrix. In 
compact bone, the haversian systems are packed tightly together to form 
what appears to be a solid mass. The osteonic canals contain blood vessels 
that are parallel to the long axis of the bone. These blood vessels 
interconnect, by way of perforating canals, with vessels on the surface of the 
bone. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 54 
 
 
Spongy (Cancellous) Bone 
Spongy (cancellous) bone is lighter and less dense than compact bone. 
Spongy bone consists of plates (trabeculae) and bars of bone adjacent to 
small, irregular cavities that contain red bone marrow. The canaliculi 
connect to the adjacent cavities, instead of a central haversian canal, to 
receive their blood supply. It may appear that the trabeculae are arranged in 
a haphazard manner, but they are organized to provide maximum strength 
similar to braces that are used to support a building. The trabeculae of 
spongy bone follow the lines of stress and can realign if the direction of 
stress changes. 
Microscopic Structure of Bones 
 
The skeleton makes up about 30-40% of an adult‘s body mass. The 
skeleton‘s mass is made up of nonliving bone matrix and many tiny bone 
cells. Roughly half of the bone matrix‘s mass is water, while the other half 
is collagen protein and solid crystals of calcium carbonate and calcium 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 55 
 
phosphate.  
 
Living bone cells are found on the edges of bones and in small cavities 
inside of the bone matrix. Although these cells make up very little of the 
total bone mass, they have several very important roles in the functions of 
the skeletal system. The bone cells allow bones to: 
 Grow and develop 
 Be repaired following an injury or daily wear 
 Be broken down to release their stored minerals 
BONE DEVELOPMENT & GROWTH 
The terms osteogenesis and ossification are often used synonymously to 
indicate the process of bone formation. Parts of the skeleton form during the 
first few weeks after conception. By the end of the eighth week after 
conception, the skeletal pattern is formed in cartilage and connective tissue 
membranes and ossification begins. 
Bone development continues throughout adulthood. Even after adult stature 
is attained, bone development continues for repair of fractures and for 
remodeling to meet changing lifestyles. Osteoblasts, osteocytes and 
osteoclasts are the three cell types involved in the development, growth and 
remodeling of bones. Osteoblasts are bone-forming cells, osteocytes are 
mature bone cells and osteoclasts break down and reabsorb bone. 
There are two types of ossification: intramembranous and endochondral. 
Intramembranous 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 56 
 
Intramembranous ossification involves the replacement of sheet-like 
connective tissue membranes with bony tissue. Bones formed in this manner 
are called intramembranous bones. They include certain flat bones of the 
skull and some of the irregular bones. The future bones are first formed as 
connective tissue membranes. Osteoblasts migrate to the membranes and 
deposit bony matrix around themselves. When the osteoblasts are 
surrounded by matrix they are called osteocytes. 
Endochondral Ossification 
Endochondral ossification involves the replacement of hyaline cartilage with 
bony tissue. Most of the bones of the skeleton are formed in this manner. 
These bones are called endochondral bones. In this process, the future bones 
are first formed as hyaline cartilage models. During the third month after 
conception, the perichondriumthat surrounds the hyaline cartilage "models" 
becomes infiltrated with blood vessels and osteoblasts and changes into a 
periosteum. The osteoblasts form a collar of compact bone around the 
diaphysis. At the same time, the cartilage in the center of the diaphysis 
begins to disintegrate. Osteoblasts penetrate the disintegrating cartilage and 
replace it with spongy bone. This forms a primary ossification center. 
Ossification continues from this center toward the ends of the bones. After 
spongy bone is formed in the diaphysis, osteoclasts break down the newly 
formed bone to open up the medullary cavity. 
The cartilage in the epiphyses continues to grow so the developing bone 
increases in length. Later, usually after birth, secondary ossification centers 
form in the epiphyses. Ossification in the epiphyses is similar to that in the 
diaphysis except that the spongy bone is retained instead of being broken 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 57 
 
down to form a medullary cavity. When secondary ossification is complete, 
the hyaline cartilage is totally replaced by bone except in two areas. A 
region of hyaline cartilage remains over the surface of the epiphysis as the 
articular cartilage and another area of cartilage remains between the 
epiphysis and diaphysis. This is the epiphyseal plate or growth region. 
Bone Growth 
Bones grow in length at the epiphyseal plate by a process that is similar to 
endochondral ossification. The cartilage in the region of the epiphyseal plate 
next to the epiphysis continues to grow by mitosis. The chondrocytes, in the 
region next to the diaphysis, age and degenerate. Osteoblasts move in and 
ossify the matrix to form bone. This process continues throughout childhood 
and the adolescent years until the cartilage growth slows and finally stops. 
When cartilage growth ceases, usually in the early twenties, the epiphyseal 
plate completely ossifies so that only a thin epiphyseal line remains and the 
bones can no longer grow in length. Bone growth is under the influence of 
growth hormone from the anterior pituitary gland and sex hormones from 
the ovaries and testes. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 58 
 
 
Even though bones stop growing in length in early adulthood, they can 
continue to increase in thickness or diameter throughout life in response to 
stress from increased muscle activity or to weight. The increase in diameter 
is called appositional growth. Osteoblasts in the periosteum form compact 
bone around the external bone surface. At the same time, osteoclasts in the 
endosteum break down bone on the internal bone surface, around the 
medullary cavity. These two processes together increase the diameter of the 
bone and, at the same time, keep the bone from becoming excessively heavy 
and bulky. 
 
 
Types of Bones 
 
 
All of the bones of the body can be broken down into five types: long, short, 
flat, irregular, and sesamoid. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 59 
 
 Long. Long bones are longer than they are wide and are the major bones of 
the limbs. Long bones grow more than the other classes of bone throughout 
childhood and so are responsible for the bulk of our height as adults. A 
hollow medullary cavity is found in the center of long bones and serves as a 
storage area for bone marrow. Examples of long bones include the femur, 
tibia, fibula, metatarsals, and phalanges. 
 
  
 Short. Short bones are about as long as they are wide and are often cubed or 
round in shape. The carpal bones of the wrist and the tarsal bones of the foot 
are 
examples 
of 
short 
bones. 
  
 Flat. Flat bones vary greatly in size and shape, but have the common feature 
of being very thin in one direction. Because they are thin, flat bones do not 
have a medullary cavity like the long bones. The frontal, parietal, 
and occipital bones of the cranium—along with the ribs and hip bones—are 
all examples of flat bones. 
 
  
 Irregular. Irregular bones have a shape that does not fit the pattern of the 
long, short, or flat bones. The vertebrae, sacrum, and coccyx of the spine—
as well as the sphenoid, ethmoid, and zygomatic bones of the skull—are all 
irregular bones. 
 
  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 60 
 
 Sesamoid. The sesamoid bones are formed after birth inside of tendons that 
run across joints. Sesamoid bones grow to protect the tendon from stresses 
and strains at the joint and can help to give a mechanical advantage to 
muscles pulling on the tendon. The patella and the pisiform bone of the 
carpals are the only sesamoid bones that are counted as part of the 206 bones 
of the body. Other sesamoid bones can form in the joints of the hands and 
feet, but are not present in all people. 
 
CLASSIFICATION OF BONES 
Long Bones 
 
The bones of the body come in a variety of sizes and shapes. The four 
principal types of bones are long, short, flat and irregular. Bones that are 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 61 
 
longer than they are wide are called long bones. They consist of a long shaft 
with two bulky ends or extremities. They are primarily compact bone but 
may have a large amount of spongy bone at the ends or extremities. Long 
bones include bones of the thigh, leg, arm, and forearm. 
Short Bones 
Short bones are roughly cube shaped with vertical and horizontal dimensions 
approximately equal. They consist primarily of spongy bone, which is 
covered by a thin layer of compact bone. Short bones include the bones of 
the wrist and ankle. 
Flat Bones 
Flat bones are thin, flattened, and usually curved. Most of the bones of the 
cranium are flat bones. 
Irregular Bones 
Bones that are not in any of the above three categories are classified as 
irregular bones. They are primarily spongy bone that is covered with a thin 
layer of compact bone. The vertebrae and some of the bones in the skull are 
irregular bones. 
All bones have surface markings and characteristics that make a specific 
bone unique. There are holes, depressions, smooth facets, lines, projections 
and other markings. These usually represent passageways for vessels and 
nerves, points of articulation with other bones or points of attachment for 
tendons and ligaments. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 62 
 
 
 
DIVISIONS OF THE SKELETON 
The adult human skeleton usually consists of 206 named bones. These bones 
can be grouped in two divisions: axial skeleton and appendicular skeleton. 
The 80 bones of the axial skeleton form the vertical axis of the body. They 
include the bones of the head, vertebral column, ribs and breastbone or 
sternum. The appendicular skeleton consists of 126 bones and includes the 
free appendages and their attachments to the axial skeleton. The free 
appendages are the upper and lower extremities, or limbs, and their 
attachments which are called girdles. The named bones of the body are listed 
below by category. 
AXIAL SKELETON (80 BONES) 
Skull (28) 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 63 
 
Cranial Bones 
 Parietal (2) 
 Temporal (2) 
 Frontal (1) 
 Occipital (1) 
 Ethmoid (1) 
 Sphenoid (1) 
 
 
Facial Bones 
 Maxilla (2) 
 Zygomatic (2) 
 Mandible (1) 
 Nasal (2) 
 Platine (2) 
 Inferior nasal concha (2) 
 Lacrimal (2) 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 64 
 
 Vomer (1) 
 
 
Auditory Ossicles 
 Malleus (2) 
 Incus (2) 
 Stapes (2) 
Hyoid (1) 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 65 
 
 
Vertebral Column 
 Cervical vertebrae (7) 
 Thoracic vertebrae (12) 
 Lumbar vertebrae (5) 
 Sacrum (1) 
 Coccyx (1) 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 66 
 
 
Thoracic Cage 
 Sternum (1) 
 Ribs (24) 
APPENDICULAR SKELETON (126 BONES) 
 
Pectoral girdles 
 Clavicle (2) 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 67 
 
 Scapula (2) 
 
 
Upper Extremity 
 Humerus (2) 
 Radius (2) 
 Ulna (2) 
 Carpals (16) 
 Metacarpals (10) 
 Phalanges (28) 
 
 
Pelvic Girdle 
 Coxal, innominate, or hip bones (2) 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 68 
 
 
Lower Extremity 
 Femur (2) 
 Tibia (2) 
 Fibula (2) 
 Patella (2) 
 Tarsals (14) 
 Metatarsals (10) 
 Phalanges (28) 
ARTICULATIONS 
An articulation, or joint, is where two bones come together. In terms of the 
amount of movement they allow, there are three types of joints: immovable, 
slightly movable and freely movable. 
Synarthroses 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 69 
 
Synarthroses are immovable joints. The singular form is synarthrosis. In 
these joints, the bones come in very close contact and are separated only by 
a thin layer of fibrous connective tissue. The sutures in the skull are 
examples of immovable joints. 
Amphiarthroses 
Slightly movable joints are called amphiarthroses. The singular form is 
amphiarthrosis. In this type of joint, the bones are connected by hyaline 
cartilage or fibrocartilage. The ribs connected to the sternum by costal 
cartilages are slightly movable joints connected by hyaline cartilage. The 
symphysis pubis is a slightly movable joint in which there is a fibrocartilage 
pad between the two bones. The joints between the vertebrae and the 
intervertebral disks are also of this type. 
 
Diarthroses 
Most joints in the adult body are diarthroses, or freely movable joints. The 
singular form is diarthrosis. In this type of joint, the ends of the opposing 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 70 
 
bones are covered with hyaline cartilage, the articular cartilage, and they are 
separated by a space called the joint cavity. The components of the joints are 
enclosed in a dense fibrous joint capsule. The outer layer of the capsule 
consists of the ligaments that hold the bones together. The inner layer is the 
synovial membrane that secretes synovial fluid into the joint cavity for 
lubrication. Because all of these joints have a synovial membrane, they are 
sometimes called synovial joints. 
 
Parts of Bones 
 
The long bones of the body contain many distinct regions due to the way in 
which they develop. At birth, each long bone is made of three individual 
bones separated by hyaline cartilage. Each end bone is called 
an epiphysis (epi = on; physis = to grow) while the middle bone is called a 
diaphysis (dia = passing through). The epiphyses and diaphysis grow 
towards one another and eventually fuse into one bone. The region of growth 
and eventual fusion in between the epiphysis and diaphysis is called the 
metaphysis (meta = after). Once the long bone parts have fused together, the 
only hyaline cartilage left in the bone is found as articular cartilage on the 
ends of the bone that form joints with other bones. The articular 
cartilage acts as a shock absorber and gliding surface between the bones to 
facilitate movement at the joint. 
Looking at a bone in cross section, there are several distinct layered regions 
that make up a bone. The outside of a bone is covered in a thin layer of 
dense irregular connective tissue called the periosteum. The periosteum 
contains many strong collagen fibers that are used to firmly anchor tendons 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 71 
 
and muscles to the bone for movement. Stem cells and osteoblast cells in the 
periosteum are involved in the growth and repair of the outside of the bone 
due to stress and injury. Blood vessels present in the periosteum provide 
energy to the cells on the surface of the bone and penetrate into the bone 
itself to nourish the cells inside of the bone. The periosteum also contains 
nervous tissue and many nerve endings to give bone its sensitivity to pain 
when injured. 
Deep to the periosteum is the compact bone that makes up the hard, 
mineralized portion of the bone. Compact bone is made of a matrix of hard 
mineral salts reinforced with tough collagen fibers. Many tiny cells called 
osteocytes live in small spaces in the matrix and help to maintain the 
strength and integrity of the compact bone. 
Deep to the compact bone layer is a region of spongy bone where the bone 
tissue grows in thin columns called trabeculae with spaces for red bone 
marrow in between. The trabeculae grow in a specific pattern to resist 
outside stresses with the least amount of mass possible, keeping bones light 
but strong. Long bones have a spongy bone on their ends but have a hollow 
medullary cavity in the middle of the diaphysis. The medullary cavity 
contains red bone marrow during childhood, eventually turning into yellow 
bone marrow after puberty. 
Articulations 
An articulation, or joint, is a point of contact between bones, between a bone 
and cartilage, or between a bone and a tooth. Synovial joints are the most 
common type of articulation and feature a small gap between the bones. This 
gap allows a free range of motion and space for synovial fluid to lubricate 
the joint. Fibrous joints exist where bones are very tightly joined and offer 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 72 
 
little to no movement between the bones. Fibrous joints also hold teeth in 
their bony sockets. Finally, cartilaginous joints are formed where bone meets 
cartilage or where there is a layer of cartilage between two bones. These 
joints provide a small amount of flexibility in the joint due to the gel-like 
consistency of cartilage. 
Support and Protection 
 
The skeletal system‘s primary function is to form a solid framework that 
supports and protects the body's organs and anchors the skeletal muscles. 
The bones of the axial skeleton act as a hard shell to protect the internal 
organs—such as the brain and the heart—from damage caused by external 
forces. The bones of the appendicle skeleton provide support and flexibility 
at the joints and anchor the muscles that move the limbs. 
Movement 
The bones of the skeletal system act as attachment points for the skeletal 
muscles of the body. Almost every skeletal muscle works by pulling two or 
more bones either closer together or further apart. Joints act as pivot points 
for the movement of the bones. The regions of each bone where muscles 
attach to the bone grow larger and stronger to support the additional force of 
the muscle. In addition, the overall mass and thickness of a bone increase 
when it is under a lot of stress from lifting weights or supporting body 
weight. 
Hematopoiesis 
Red bone marrow produces red and white blood cells in a process known as 
hematopoietic. Red bone marrow is found in the hollow space inside of 
bones known as the medullary cavity. Children tend to have more red bone 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 73 
 
marrow compared to their body size than adults do, due to their body‘s 
constant growth and development. The amount of red bone marrow drops 
off at the end of puberty, replaced by yellow bone marrow. 
Storage 
The skeletal system stores many different types of essential substances to 
facilitate growth and repair of the body. The skeletal system‘s cell matrix 
acts as our calcium bank by storing and releasing calcium ions into the blood 
as needed. Proper levels of calcium ions in the blood are essential to the 
proper function of the nervous and muscular systems. Bone cells also release 
osteocalcin, a hormone that helps regulate blood sugar and fat deposition. 
The yellow bone marrow inside of our hollow long bones is used to store 
energy in the form of lipids. Finally, red bone marrow stores some iron in 
the form of the molecule ferritin and uses this iron to form hemoglobin in 
red blood cells. 
Growth and Development 
 
The skeleton begins to form early in fetal development as a flexible skeleton 
made of hyaline cartilage and dense irregular fibrous connective tissue. 
These tissues act as a soft, growing framework and placeholder for the bony 
skeleton that will replace them. As development progresses, blood vessels 
begin to grow into the soft fetal skeleton, bringing stem cells and nutrients 
for bone growth. Osseous tissue slowly replaces the cartilage and fibrous 
tissue in a process called calcification. The calcified areas spread out from 
their blood vessels replacing the old tissues until they reach the border of 
another bony area. At birth, the skeleton of a newborn has more than 300 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 74 
 
bones; as a person ages, these bones grow together and fuse into larger 
bones, leaving adults with only 206 bones. 
Flat bones follow the process of intramembranous ossification where the 
young bones grow from a primary ossification center in fibrous membranes 
and leave a small region of fibrous tissue in between each other. In the skull 
these soft spots are known as fontanels, and give the skull flexibility and 
room for the bones to grow. Bone slowly replaces the fontanels until the 
individual bones of the skull fuse together to form a rigid adult skull. 
Long bones follow the process of endochondral ossification where the 
diaphysis grows inside of cartilage from a primary ossification center until it 
forms most of the bone. The epiphyses then grow from secondary 
ossification centers on the ends of the bone. A small band of hyaline 
cartilage remains in between the bones as a growth plate. As we grow 
through childhood, the growth plates grow under the influence of growth 
and sex hormones, slowly separating the bones. At the same time the bones 
grow larger by growing back into the growth plates. This process continues 
until the end of puberty, when the growth plate stops growing and the bones 
fuse permanently into a single bone. The vast difference in height and limb 
length between birth and adulthood are mainly the result of endochondral 
ossification in the long bones. 
Here is what we have learned from Introduction to the Skeletal System: 
 The human skeleton is well-adapted for the functions it must perform. 
Functions of bones include support, protection, movement, mineral 
storage, and formation of blood cells. 
 There are two types of bone tissue: compact and spongy. Compact 
bone consists of closely packed osteons, or haversian system. Spongy 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 75 
 
bone consists of plates of bone, called trabeculae, around irregular 
spaces that contain red bone marrow. 
 Osteogenesis is the process of bone formation. Three types of cells, 
osteoblasts, osteocytes, and osteoclasts, are involved in bone 
formation and remodeling. 
 In intramembranous ossification, connective tissue membranes are 
replaced by bone. This process occurs in the flat bones of the skull. In 
endochondral ossification, bone tissue replaces hyaline cartilage 
models. Most bones are formed in this manner. 
 Bones grow in length at the epiphyseal plate between the diaphysis 
and the epiphysis. When the epiphyseal plate completely ossifies, 
bones no longer increase in length. 
 Bones may be classified as long, short, flat, or irregular. The diaphysis 
of a long bone is the central shaft. There is an epiphysis at each end of 
the diaphysis. 
 The adult human skeleton usually consists of 206 named bones and 
these bones can be grouped in two divisions: axial skeleton and 
appendicular skeleton. 
 The bones of the skeleton are grouped in two divisions: axial skeleton 
and appendicular skeleton. 
 There are three types of joints in terms of the amount of movement 
they allow: synarthroses (immovable), amphiarthroses (slightly 
movable), and diarthroses (freely movable). 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anatomical Structure of human body 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 77 
 
 
INTRODUCTION TO THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
The muscular system is composed of specialized cells called muscle fibers. 
Their predominant function is contractibility. Muscles, attached to bones or 
internal organs and blood vessels, are responsible for movement. Nearly all 
movement in the body is the result of muscle contraction. Exceptions to this 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 78 
 
are the action of cilia, the flagellumon sperm cells, and amoeboid movement 
of some white blood cells. 
The integrated action of joints, bones, and skeletal muscles produces 
obvious movements such as walking and running. Skeletal muscles also 
produce more subtle movements that result in various facial expressions, eye 
movements, and respiration. 
In addition to movement, muscle contraction also fulfills some other 
important functions in the body, such as posture, joint stability, and heat 
production. Posture, such as sitting and standing, is maintained as a result of 
muscle contraction. The skeletal muscles are continually making fine 
adjustments that hold the body in stationary positions. The tendons of many 
muscles extend over joints and in this way contribute to joint stability. This 
is particularly evident in the knee and shoulder joints, where muscle tendons 
are a major factor in stabilizing the joint. Heat production, to maintain body 
temperature, is an important by-product of muscle metabolism. Nearly 85 
percent of the heat produced in the body is the result of muscle contraction. 
Muscular System 
The muscular system is responsible for the movement of the human body. 
Attached to the bones of the skeletal system are about 700 named muscles 
that make up roughly half of a person‘s body weight. Each of these muscles 
is a discrete organ constructed of skeletal muscle tissue, blood vessels, 
tendons, and nerves. Muscle tissue is also found inside of the heart, digestive 
organs, and blood vessels. In these organs, muscles serve to move 
substances throughout the body. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 79 
 
 
Muscle Types 
 
There are three types of muscle tissue: Visceral, cardiac, and skeletal. 
1. Visceral Muscle. Visceral muscle is found inside of organs like 
the stomach, intestines, and blood vessels. The weakest of all muscle 
tissues, visceral muscle makes organs contract to move substances through 
the organ. Because visceral muscle is controlled by the unconscious part of 
the brain, it is known as involuntary muscle—it cannot be directly controlled 
by the conscious mind. The term ―smooth muscle‖ is often used to describe 
visceral muscle because it has a very smooth, uniform appearance when 
viewed under a microscope. This smooth appearance starkly contrasts with 
the banded appearance of cardiac and skeletal muscles. 
 
2. Cardiac Muscle. Found only in the heart, cardiac muscle is responsible for 
pumping blood throughout the body. Cardiac muscle tissue cannot be 
controlled consciously, so it is an involuntary muscle. While hormones and 
signals from the brain adjust the rate of contraction, cardiac muscle 
stimulates itself to contract. The natural pacemaker of the heart is made of 
cardiac muscle tissue that stimulates other cardiac muscle cells to contract. 
Because of its self-stimulation, cardiac muscle is considered to be auto 
rhythmic 
or 
intrinsically 
controlled.  
 
The cells of cardiac muscle tissue are striated—that is, they appear to have 
light and dark stripes when viewed under a light microscope. The 
arrangement of protein fibers inside of the cells causes these light and dark 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 80 
 
bands. Striations indicate that a muscle cell is very strong, unlike visceral 
muscles. 
  
 
The cells of cardiac muscle are branched X or Y shaped cells tightly 
connected together by special junctions called intercalated disks. Intercalated 
disks are made up of fingerlike projections from two neighboring cells that 
interlock and provide a strong bond between the cells. The branched 
structure and intercalated disks allow the muscle cells to resist high blood 
pressures and the strain of pumping blood throughout a lifetime. These 
features also help to spread electrochemical signals quickly from cell to cell 
so that the heart can beat as a unit. 
 
3. Skeletal Muscle. Skeletal muscle is the only voluntary muscle tissue in the 
human body—it is controlled consciously. Every physical action that a 
person consciously performs (e.g. speaking, walking, or writing) requires 
skeletal muscle. The function of skeletal muscle is to contract to move parts 
of the body closer to the bone that the muscle is attached to. Most skeletal 
muscles are attached to two bones across a joint, so the muscle serves to 
move parts of those bones closer to each other.  
 
 
Skeletal muscle cells form when many smaller progenitor cells lump 
themselves together to form long, straight, multinucleated fibers. Striated 
just like cardiac muscle, these skeletal muscle fibers are very strong. Skeletal 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 81 
 
muscle derives its name from the fact that these muscles always connect to 
the skeleton in at least one place. 
MUSCLE TYPES 
In the body, there are three types of muscle: skeletal (striated), smooth, and 
cardiac. 
Skeletal Muscle 
Skeletal muscle, attached to bones, is responsible for skeletal movements. 
The peripheral portion of the central nervous system (CNS) controls the 
skeletal muscles. Thus, these muscles are under conscious, or voluntary, 
control. The basic unit is the muscle fiber with many nuclei. These muscle 
fibers are striated (having transverse streaks) and each acts independently of 
neighboring muscle fibers. 
Smooth Muscle 
Smooth muscle, found in the walls of the hollow internal organs such as 
blood vessels, the gastrointestinal tract, bladder, and uterus, is under control 
of the autonomic nervous system. Smooth muscle cannot be controlled 
consciously and thus acts involuntarily. The non-striated (smooth) muscle 
cell is spindle-shaped and has one central nucleus. Smooth muscle contracts 
slowly and rhythmically. 
Cardiac Muscle 
Cardiac muscle, found in the walls of the heart, is also under control of the 
autonomic nervous system. The cardiac muscle cell has one central nucleus, 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 82 
 
like smooth muscle, but it also is striated, like skeletal muscle. The cardiac 
muscle cell is rectangular in shape. The contraction of cardiac muscle is 
involuntary, strong, and rhythmical. 
Smooth and cardiac muscle will be discussed in detail with respect to their 
appropriate systems. This unit mainly covers the skeletal muscular system. 
MUSCLE GROUPS 
There are more than 600 muscles in the body, which together account for 
about 40 percent of a person's weight. 
Most skeletal muscles have names that describe some feature of the muscle. 
Often several criteria are combined into one name. Associating the muscle's 
characteristics with its name will help you learn and remember them. The 
following are some terms relating to muscle features that are used in naming 
muscles. 
 Size: vastus (huge); maximus (large); longus (long); minimus (small); 
brevis (short). 
 Shape: deltoid (triangular); rhomboid (like a rhombus with equal and 
parallel sides); latissimus (wide); teres (round); trapezius (like a 
trapezoid, a four-sided figure with two sides parallel). 
 Direction of fibers: rectus (straight); transverse (across); oblique 
(diagonally); orbicularis (circular). 
 Location: pectoralis (chest); gluteus (buttock or rump); brachii (arm); 
supra- (above); infra- (below); sub- (under or beneath); lateralis 
(lateral). 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 83 
 
 Number of origins: biceps (two heads); triceps (three heads); 
quadriceps (four heads). 
 Origin and insertion: sternocleidomastoideus (origin on the sternum 
and clavicle, insertion on the mastoid process); brachioradialis (origin 
on the brachium or arm, insertion on the radius). 
 Action: abductor (to abduct a structure); adductor (to adduct a 
structure); flexor (to flex a structure); extensor (to extend a structure); 
levator (to lift or elevate a structure); masseter (a chewer). 
MUSCLES OF THE HEAD AND NECK 
Humans have well-developed muscles in the face that permit a large variety 
of facial expressions. Because the muscles are used to show surprise, 
disgust, anger, fear, and other emotions, they are an important means of 
nonverbal communication. Muscles of facial expression include frontalis, 
orbicularis oris, laris oculi, buccinator, and zygomaticus.These muscles of 
facial expressions are identified in the illustration below. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 84 
 
 
There are four pairs of muscles that are responsible for chewing movements 
or mastication. All of these muscles connect to the mandible and they are 
some of the strongest muscles in the body. Two of the muscles, temporalis 
and masseter, are identified in the illustration above. 
There are numerous muscles associated with the throat, the hyoid bone and 
the vertebral column; only two of the more obvious and superficial neck 
muscles are identified in the illustration: sternocleidomastoid and trapezius. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 85 
 
MUSCLES OF THE TRUNK 
The muscles of the trunk include those that move the vertebral column, the 
muscles that form the thoracic and abdominal walls, and those that cover the 
pelvic outlet. 
 
The erector spinae group of muscles on each side of the vertebral column is 
a large muscle mass that extends from the sacrum to the skull. These 
muscles are primarily responsible for extending the vertebral column to 
maintain erect posture. The deep back muscles occupy the space between the 
spinous and transverse processes of adjacent vertebrae. 
The muscles of the thoracic wall are involved primarily in the process of 
breathing. The intercostal muscles are located in spaces between the ribs. 
They contract during forced expiration. External intercostal muscles contract 
to elevate the ribs during the inspiration phase of breathing. The diaphragm 
is a dome-shaped muscle that forms a partition between the thorax and the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 86 
 
abdomen. It has three openings in it for structures that have to pass from the 
thorax to the abdomen. 
The abdomen, unlike the thorax and pelvis, has no bony reinforcements or 
protection. The wall consists entirely of four muscle pairs, arranged in 
layers, and the fascia that envelops them. The abdominal wall muscles are 
identified in the illustration below. 
The pelvic outlet is formed by two muscular sheets and their associated 
fascia. 
MUSCLES OF THE UPPER EXTREMITY 
The muscles of the upper extremity include those that attach the scapula to 
the thorax and generally move the scapula, those that attach the humerus to 
the scapula and generally move the arm, and those that are located in the arm 
or forearm that move the forearm, wrist, and hand. The illustration below 
shows some of the muscles of the upper extremity. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 87 
 
Muscles that move the shoulder and arm include the trapezius and serratus 
anterior. The pectoralis major, latissimus dorsi, deltoid, and rotator cuff 
muscles connect to the humerus and move the arm. 
The muscles that move the forearm are located along the humerus, which 
include the triceps brachii, biceps brachii, brachialis, and brachioradialis. 
The 20 or more muscles that cause most wrist, hand, and finger movements 
are located along the forearm. 
 
STRUCTURE OF SKELETAL MUSCLE 
A whole skeletal muscle is considered an organ of the muscular system. 
Each organ or muscle consists of skeletal muscle tissue, connective tissue, 
nerve tissue, and blood or vascular tissue. 
Skeletal muscles vary considerably in size, shape, and arrangement of fibers. 
They range from extremely tiny strands such as the stapedium muscle of the 
middle ear to large masses such as the muscles of the thigh. Some skeletal 
muscles are broad in shape and some narrow. In some muscles the fibers are 
parallel to the long axis of the muscle; in some they converge to a narrow 
attachment; and in some they are oblique. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 88 
 
 
Each skeletal muscle fiber is a single cylindrical muscle cell. An individual 
skeletal muscle may be made up of hundreds, or even thousands, of muscle 
fibers bundled together and wrapped in a connective tissue covering. Each 
muscle is surrounded by a connective tissue sheath called the epimysium. 
Fascia, connective tissue outside the epimysium, surrounds and separates the 
muscles. Portions of the epimysium project inward to divide the muscle into 
compartments. Each compartment contains a bundle of muscle fibers. Each 
bundle of muscle fiber is called a fasciculus and is surrounded by a layer of 
connective tissue called the perimysium. Within the fasciculus, each 
individual muscle cell, called a muscle fiber, is surrounded by connective 
tissue called the endomysium. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 89 
 
Skeletal muscle cells (fibers), like other body cells, are soft and fragile. The 
connective tissue covering furnish support and protection for the delicate 
cells and allow them to withstand the forces of contraction. The coverings 
also provide pathways for the passage of blood vessels and nerves. 
Commonly, the epimysium, perimysium, and endomysium extend beyond 
the fleshy part of the muscle, the belly or gaster, to form a thick ropelike 
tendon or a broad, flat sheet-like aponeurosis. The tendon and aponeurosis 
form indirect attachments from muscles to the periosteum of bones or to the 
connective tissue of other muscles. Typically a muscle spans a joint and is 
attached to bones by tendons at both ends. One of the bones remains 
relatively fixed or stable while the other end moves as a result of muscle 
contraction. 
Skeletal muscles have an abundant supply of blood vessels and nerves. This 
is directly related to the primary function of skeletal muscle, contraction. 
Before a skeletal muscle fiber can contract, it has to receive an impulse from 
a nerve cell. Generally, an artery and at least one vein accompany each nerve 
that penetrates the epimysium of a skeletal muscle. Branches of the nerve 
and blood vessels follow the connective tissue components of the muscle of 
a nerve cell and with one or more minute blood vessels called capillaries. 
 
 
Gross Anatomy of a Skeletal Muscle 
 
Most skeletal muscles are attached to two bones through tendons. Tendons 
are tough bands of dense regular connective tissue whose strong collagen 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 90 
 
fibers firmly attach muscles to bones. Tendons are under extreme stress 
when muscles pull on them, so they are very strong and are woven into the 
coverings of both muscles and bones. 
Muscles move by shortening their length, pulling on tendons, and moving 
bones closer to each other. One of the bones is pulled towards the other 
bone, which remains stationary. The place on the stationary bone that is 
connected via tendons to the muscle is called the origin. The place on the 
moving bone that is connected to the muscle via tendons is called the 
insertion. The belly of the muscle is the fleshy part of the muscle in between 
the tendons that does the actual contraction. 
Names of Skeletal Muscles 
 
Skeletal muscles are named based on many different factors, including their 
location, origin and insertion, number of origins, shape, size, direction, and 
function. 
 Location. Many muscles derive their names from their anatomical region. 
The rectus abdominis and transverse abdominis, for example, are found in 
theabdominal region. Some muscles, like the tibialis anterior, are named 
after the part of the bone (the anterior portion of the tibia) that they are 
attached to. Other muscles use a hybrid of these two, like the brachioradialis, 
which is named after a region (brachial) and a bone (radius). 
 
  
 Origin and Insertion. Some muscles are named based upon their connection 
to a stationary bone (origin) and a moving bone (insertion). These muscles 
become very easy to identify once you know the names of the bones that 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 91 
 
they are attached to. Examples of this type of muscle include 
the sternocleidomastoid (connecting 
thesternum and clavicle to 
the 
mastoid process of the skull) and the occipitofrontalis (connecting 
the occipital 
bone to 
the frontal 
bone). 
  
 Number of Origins. Some muscles connect to more than one bone or to more 
than one place on a bone, and therefore have more than one origin. A muscle 
with two origins is called a biceps. A muscle with three origins is a triceps 
muscle. Finally, a muscle with four origins is a quadriceps muscle. 
  
 Shape, Size, and Direction. We also classify muscles by their shapes. For 
example, the deltoids have a delta or triangular shape. The serratus muscles 
feature a serrated or saw-like shape. The rhomboid major is a rhombus or 
diamond shape. The size of the muscle can be used to distinguish between 
two muscles found in the same region. The gluteal region contains three 
muscles differentiated by size—the gluteus maximus (large), gluteus medius 
(medium), and gluteus minimus (smallest). Finally, the direction in which 
the muscle fibers run can be used to identify a muscle. In the abdominal 
region, there are several sets of wide, flat muscles. The muscles whose fibers 
run straight up and down are the rectus abdominis, the ones running 
transversely (left to right) are the transverse abdominis, and the ones running 
at 
an 
angle 
are 
the 
obliques. 
  
 Function. Muscles are sometimes classified by the type of function that they 
perform. Most of the muscles of the forearms are named based on their 
function because they are located in the same region and have similar shapes 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 92 
 
and sizes. For example, the flexor group of the forearm flexes the wrist and 
the fingers. The supinator is a muscle that supinates the wrist by rolling it 
over to face palm up. In the leg, there are muscles called adductors whose 
role is to adduct (pull together) the legs. 
 
 
Groups Action in Skeletal Muscle 
 
Skeletal muscles rarely work by themselves to achieve movements in the 
body. More often they work in groups to produce precise movements. The 
muscle that produces any particular movement of the body is known as an 
agonist or prime mover. The agonist always pairs with an antagonist muscle 
that produces the opposite effect on the same bones. For example, the biceps 
brachii muscle flexes the arm at the elbow. As the antagonist for this motion, 
the triceps brachii muscle extends the arm at the elbow. When the triceps is 
extending the arm, the biceps would be considered the antagonist. 
In addition to the agonist/antagonist pairing, other muscles work to support 
the movements of the agonist. Synergists are muscles that help to stabilize a 
movement and reduce extraneous movements. They are usually found in 
regions near the agonist and often connect to the same bones. Because 
skeletal muscles move the insertion closer to the immobile origin, fixator 
muscles assist in movement by holding the origin stable. If you lift 
something heavy with your arms, fixators in the trunk region hold your body 
upright and immobile so that you maintain your balance while lifting. 
Skeletal Muscle Histology 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 93 
 
 
Skeletal muscle fibers differ dramatically from other tissues of the body due 
to their highly specialized functions. Many of the organelles that make up 
muscle fibers are unique to this type of cell.  
 
 
The sarcolemma is the cell membrane of muscle fibers. The sarcolemma acts 
as a conductor for electrochemical signals that stimulate muscle cells. 
Connected to the sarcolemma are transverse tubules (T-tubules) that help 
carry these electrochemical signals into the middle of the muscle fiber. The 
sarcoplasmic reticulum serves as a storage facility for calcium ions (Ca2+) 
that are vital to muscle contraction. Mitochondria, the ―power houses‖ of the 
cell, are abundant in muscle cells to break down sugars and provide energy 
in the form of ATP to active muscles. Most of the muscle fiber‘s structure is 
made up of myofibrils, which are the contractile structures of the cell. 
Myofibrils are made up of many proteins fibers arranged into repeating 
subunits called sarcomeres. The sarcomere is the functional unit of muscle 
fibers. (See Macronutrients for more information about the roles of sugars 
and proteins.) 
Sarcomere Structure 
 
Sarcomeres are made of two types of protein fibers: thick filaments and thin 
filaments. 
 Thick filaments. Thick filaments are made of many bonded units of the 
protein myosin. Myosin is the protein that causes muscles to contract.  
 Thin filaments. Thin filaments are made of three proteins: 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 94 
 
 
 
 
1. Actin. Actin forms a helical structure that makes up the bulk of the thin 
filament mass. Actin contains myosin-binding sites that allow myosin to 
connect to and move actin during muscle contraction.  
2. Tropomyosin. Tropomyosin is a long protein fiber that wraps around actin 
and covers the myosin binding sites on actin. 
3. Troponin. Bound very tightly to tropomyosin, troponin moves tropomyosin 
away from myosin binding sites during muscle contraction. 
 
Function of Muscle Tissue 
 
The main function of the muscular system is movement. Muscles are the 
only tissue in the body that has the ability to contract and therefore move the 
other parts of the body. 
Related to the function of movement is the muscular system‘s second 
function: the maintenance of posture and body position. Muscles often 
contract to hold the body still or in a particular position rather than to cause 
movement. The muscles responsible for the body‘s posture have the greatest 
endurance of all muscles in the body—they hold up the body throughout the 
day without becoming tired. 
Another function related to movement is the movement of substances inside 
the body. The cardiac and visceral muscles are primarily responsible for 
transporting substances like blood or food from one part of the body to 
another. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 95 
 
The final function of muscle tissue is the generation of body heat. As a result 
of the high metabolic rate of contracting muscle, our muscular system 
produces a great deal of waste heat. Many small muscle contractions within 
the body produce our natural body heat. When we exert ourselves more than 
normal, the extra muscle contractions lead to a rise in body temperature and 
eventually to sweating. 
Skeletal Muscles as Levers 
 
Skeletal muscles work together with bones and joints to form lever systems. 
The muscle acts as the effort force; the joint acts as the fulcrum; the bone 
that the muscle moves acts as the lever; and the object being moved acts as 
the load. 
There are three classes of levers, but the vast majority of the levers in the 
body are third class levers. A third class lever is a system in which the 
fulcrum is at the end of the lever and the effort is between the fulcrum and 
the load at the other end of the lever. The third class levers in the body serve 
to increase the distance moved by the load compared to the distance that the 
muscle contracts. 
The tradeoff for this increase in distance is that the force required to move 
the load must be greater than the mass of the load. For example, the biceps 
brachia of the arm pulls on the radius of the forearm, causing flexion at 
the elbow joint in a third class lever system. A very slight change in the 
length of the biceps causes a much larger movement of the forearm and 
hand, but the force applied by the biceps must be higher than the load moved 
by the muscle. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 96 
 
Motor Units 
 
Nerve cells called motor neurons control the skeletal muscles. Each motor 
neuron controls several muscle cells in a group known as a motor unit. 
When a motor neuron receives a signal from the brain, it stimulates all of the 
muscles cells in its motor unit at the same time. 
The size of motor units varies throughout the body, depending on the 
function of a muscle. Muscles that perform fine movements—like those of 
the eyes or fingers—have very few muscle fibers in each motor unit to 
improve the precision of the brain‘s control over these structures. Muscles 
that need a lot of strength to perform their function—like leg or arm 
muscles—have many muscle cells in each motor unit. One of the ways that 
the body can control the strength of each muscle is by determining how 
many motor units to activate for a given function. This explains why the 
same muscles that are used to pick up a pencil are also used to pick up a 
bowling ball. 
 
Contraction Cycle 
 
Muscles contract when stimulated by signals from their motor neurons. 
Motor neurons contact muscle cells at a point called the Neuromuscular 
Junction (NMJ). Motor neurons release neurotransmitter chemicals at the 
NMJ that bond to a special part of the sarcolemma known as the motor end 
plate. The motor end plate contains many ion channels that open in response 
to neurotransmitters and allow positive ions to enter the muscle fiber. The 
positive ions form an electrochemical gradient to form inside of the cell, 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 97 
 
which spreads throughout the sarcolemma and the T-tubules by opening 
even more ion channels. 
 
 
When the positive ions reach the sarcoplasmic reticulum, Ca2+ ions are 
released and allowed to flow into the myofibrils. Ca2+ ions bind to troponin, 
which causes the troponin molecule to change shape and move nearby 
molecules of tropomyosin. Tropomyosin is moved away from myosin 
binding sites on actin molecules, allowing actin and myosin to bind together. 
ATP molecules power myosin proteins in the thick filaments to bend and 
pull on actin molecules in the thin filaments. Myosin proteins act like oars 
on a boat, pulling the thin filaments closer to the center of a sarcomere. As 
the thin filaments are pulled together, the sarcomere shortens and contracts. 
Myofibrils of muscle fibers are made of many sarcomeres in a row, so that 
when all of the sarcomeres contract, the muscle cells shortens with a great 
force relative to its size. 
Muscles continue contraction as long as they are stimulated by a 
neurotransmitter. When a motor neuron stops the release of the 
neurotransmitter, the process of contraction reverses itself. Calcium returns 
to the sarcoplasmic reticulum; troponin and tropomyosin return to their 
resting positions; and actin and myosin are prevented from binding. 
Sarcomeres return to their elongated resting state once the force of myosin 
pulling on actin has stopped. 
Types of Muscle Contraction 
 
The strength of a muscle‘s contraction can be controlled by two factors: the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 98 
 
number of motor units involved in contraction and the amount of stimulus 
from the nervous system. A single nerve impulse of a motor neuron will 
cause a motor unit to contract briefly before relaxing. This small contraction 
is known as a twitch contraction. If the motor neuron provides several 
signals within a short period of time, the strength and duration of the muscle 
contraction increases. This phenomenon is known as temporal summation. If 
the motor neuron provides many nerve impulses in rapid succession, the 
muscle may enter the state of tetanus, or complete and lasting contraction. A 
muscle will remain in tetanus until the nerve signal rate slows or until the 
muscle becomes too fatigued to maintain the tetanus. 
Not all muscle contractions produce movement. Isometric contractions are 
light contractions that increase the tension in the muscle without exerting 
enough force to move a body part. When people tense their bodies due to 
stress, they are performing an isometric contraction. Holding an object still 
and maintaining posture are also the result of isometric contractions. A 
contraction that does produce movement is an isotonic contraction. Isotonic 
contractions are required to develop muscle mass through weight lifting. 
Muscle tone is a natural condition in which a skeletal muscle stays partially 
contracted at all times. Muscle tone provides a slight tension on the muscle 
to prevent damage to the muscle and joints from sudden movements, and 
also helps to maintain the body‘s posture. All muscles maintain some 
amount of muscle tone at all times, unless the muscle has been disconnected 
from the central nervous system due to nerve damage. 
Functional Types of Skeletal Muscle Fibers 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 99 
 
 
Skeletal muscle fibers can be divided into two types based on how they 
produce and use energy: Type I and Type II. 
1. Type I fibers are very slow and deliberate in their contractions. They are 
very resistant to fatigue because they use aerobic respiration to produce 
energy from sugar. We find Type I fibers in muscles throughout the body for 
stamina and posture. Near the spine and neck regions, very high 
concentrations of Type I fibers hold the body up throughout the day. 
 
  
2. Type II fibers are broken down into two subgroups: Type II A and Type II 
B. 
 Type II A fibers are faster and stronger than Type I fibers, but do not have as 
much endurance. Type II A fibers are found throughout the body, but 
especially in the legs where they work to support your body throughout a 
long day of walking and standing. 
 
  
 Type II B fibers are even faster and stronger than Type II A, but have even 
less endurance. Type II B fibers are also much lighter in color than Type I 
and Type II A due to their lack of myoglobin, an oxygen-storing pigment. 
We find Type II B fibers throughout the body, but particularly in the upper 
body where they give speed and strength to the arms and chest at the 
expense of stamina. 
 
Muscle Metabolism and Fatigue 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 100 
 
 
Muscles get their energy from different sources depending on the situation 
that the muscle is working in. Muscles use aerobic respiration when we call 
on them to produce a low to moderate level of force. Aerobic respiration 
requires oxygen to produce about 36-38 ATP molecules from a molecule of 
glucose. Aerobic respiration is very efficient, and can continue as long as a 
muscle receives adequate amounts of oxygen and glucose to keep 
contracting. When we use muscles to produce a high level of force, they 
become so tightly contracted that oxygen carrying blood cannot enter the 
muscle. This condition causes the muscle to create energy using lactic acid 
fermentation, a form of anaerobic respiration. Anaerobic respiration is much 
less efficient than aerobic respiration—only 2 ATP are produced for each 
molecule of glucose. Muscles quickly tire as they burn through their energy 
reserves under anaerobic respiration. 
To keep muscles working for a longer period of time, muscle fibers contain 
several important energy molecules. Myoglobin, a red pigment found in 
muscles, contains iron and stores oxygen in a manner similar to hemoglobin 
in the blood. The oxygen from myoglobin allows muscles to continue 
aerobic respiration in the absence of oxygen. Another chemical that helps to 
keep muscles working is cretin phosphate. Muscles use energy in the form of 
ATP, converting ATP to ADP to release its energy. Cretin phosphate 
donates its phosphate group to ADP to turn it back into ATP in order to 
provide extra energy to the muscle. Finally, muscle fibers contain energy-
storing glycogen, a large macromolecule made of many linked glucoses. 
Active muscles break glucoses off of glycogen molecules to provide an 
internal fuel supply. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 101 
 
When muscles run out of energy during either aerobic or anaerobic 
respiration, the muscle quickly tires and loses its ability to contract. This 
condition is known as muscle fatigue. A fatigued muscle contains very little 
or no oxygen, glucose or ATP, but instead has many waste products from 
respiration, like lactic acid and ADP. The body must take in extra oxygen 
after exertion to replace the oxygen that was stored in myoglobin in the 
muscle fiber as well as to power the aerobic respiration that will rebuild the 
energy supplies inside of the cell. Oxygen debt (or recovery oxygen uptake) 
is the name for the extra oxygen that the body must take in to restore the 
muscle cells to their resting state. This explains why you feel out of breath 
for a few minutes after a strenuous activity—your body is trying to restore 
itself to its normal state. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 102 
 
 
 
 
 
Cardiovascular System 
The cardiovascular system consists of the heart, blood vessels, and the 
approximately 5 liters of blood that the blood vessels transport. Responsible 
for transporting oxygen, nutrients, hormones, and cellular waste products 
throughout the body, the cardiovascular system is powered by the body‘s 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 103 
 
hardest-working organ — the heart, which is only about the size of a closed 
fist. Even at rest, the average heart easily pumps over 5 liters of blood 
throughout the body every minute. 
 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Heart  
The heart is a muscular pumping organ located medial to the lungs along 
the body‘s midline in the thoracic region. The bottom tip of the heart, known 
as its apex, is turned to the left, so that about 2/3 of the heart is located on 
the body‘s left side with the other 1/3 on right. The top of the heart, known 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 105 
 
as the heart‘s base, connects to the great blood vessels of the body: 
the aorta, vena cava, pulmonary trunk, and pulmonary veins. 
 
 
 
 
 
The Heart 
The heart is a hollow muscular organ which beats over 100,000 times a day 
to pump blood around the body's 60,000 miles of blood vessels. The right 
side of the heart receives blood and sends it to the lungs to be oxygenated, 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 106 
 
while the left side receives oxygenated blood from the lungs and sends it out 
to the tissues of the body.  
The Heart has three layers; the ENDOCARDIUM (inner layer), the 
EPICARDIUM (middle layer), and MYOCARDIUM (outer layer).  
The heart is protected by the PERICARDIUM which the protective 
membrane is surrounding it. 
The heart has FOUR CHAMBERS, in the lower heart the right and left 
Ventricles, and in the upper heart the right and left Atria. In a normal heart 
beat the atria contract while the ventricles relax, then the ventricles contract 
while the atria relax. There are VALVES through which blood passes 
between ventricle and atrium, these close in such a way that blood does not 
backwash during the pauses between ventricular contractions. The right and 
left ventricles are divided by a thick wall (the VENTRICULAR SEPTUM), 
babies born with "hole in the heart" have a small gap here, which is a 
problem since oxygenated and deoxygenated can blood mix. The walls of 
the left ventricle are thicker as it has to pump blood to all the tissues, 
compared to the right ventricle which only pumps blood as far as the lungs. 
The spleen 
This is a large flat oval organ located below the diaphragm, it's main 
function is to STORE BLOOD. The size of the spleen can vary, for example 
it may enlarge when the body is fighting infection also it's size tends to 
decrease with age. It is a non-vital organ and it is possible to survive after 
removal of the spleen. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 107 
 
Perinicious anaemia is a Vitamin B12 deficiency resulting in a reduction in 
number of erythrocytes. 
Aplastic anemia is a failure of the bone marrow to produce the enough red 
blood cells. 
Septicaemia - bacterial toxins in blood. 
 
Circulatory Loops 
 
There are 2 primary circulatory loops in the human body: the pulmonary 
circulation loop and the systemic circulation loop. 
1. Pulmonary circulation transports deoxygenated blood from the right side of 
the heart to the lungs, where the blood picks up oxygen and returns to the 
left side of the heart. The pumping chambers of the heart that support the 
pulmonary circulation loop are the right atrium and right ventricle. 
2. Systemic circulation carries highly oxygenated blood from the left side of 
the heart to all of the tissues of the body (with the exception of the heart and 
lungs). Systemic circulation removes wastes from body tissues and returns 
deoxygenated blood to the right side of the heart. The left atrium and left 
ventricle of the heart are the pumping chambers for the systemic circulation 
loop. 
 
Blood Vessels  
 
Blood vessels are the body‘s highways that allow blood to flow quickly and 
efficiently from the heart to every region of the body and back again. The 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 108 
 
size of blood vessels corresponds with the amount of blood that passes 
through the vessel. All blood vessels contain a hollow area called the lumen 
through which blood is able to flow. Around the lumen is the wall of the 
vessel, which may be thin in the case of capillaries or very thick in the case 
of arteries. 
 
ARTERIES carry oxygenated blood away from the heart. They are thick 
hollow tubes which are highly ELASTIC which allows them to DILATE 
(widen) and constrict (narrow) as blood is forced down them by the heart. 
Arteries branch and re-branch, becoming smaller until they become small 
ARTERIOLES which are even more elastic. Arterioles feed oxygenated 
blood to the capillaries. The AORTA is the largest artery in the body, taking 
blood from the heart, branching into other arteries that send oxygenated 
blood to the rest of the body. 
 
CAPILLARIES distribute the nutrients and oxygen to the body's tissues 
and remove deoxygenated blood and waste. They are extremely thin, the 
walls are only one cell thick and connect the arterioles with the venules 
(very small veins). 
 
VENULES (very small veins) merge into VEINS which carry blood back to 
the heart. The vein walls are similar to arteries but thinner and less elastic. 
Veins carry deoxygenated blood towards the lungs where oxygen is received 
via the pulmonary capillaries. The PULMONARY Veins then carries this 
oxygenated blood back to the heart. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 109 
 
All blood vessels are lined with a thin layer of simple squamous epithelium 
known as the endothelium that keeps blood cells inside of the blood vessels 
and prevents clots from forming. The endothelium lines the entire 
circulatory system, all the way to the interior of the heart, where it is called 
the endocardium. 
There are three major types of blood vessels: arteries, capillaries and veins. 
Blood vessels are often named after either the region of the body through 
which they carry blood or for nearby structures. For example, 
the brachiocephalic artery carries blood into the brachial (arm) and 
cephalic (head) regions. One of its branches, the subclavian artery, runs 
under the clavicle; hence the name subclavian. The subclavian artery runs 
into the axillary region where it becomes known as the axillary artery. 
1. Arteries and Arterioles: Arteries are blood vessels that carry blood away 
from the heart. Blood carried by arteries is usually highly oxygenated, 
having just left the lungs on its way to the body‘s tissues.  
The pulmonary trunk and arteries of the pulmonary circulation loop provide 
an exception to this rule – these arteries carry deoxygenated blood from the 
heart to the lungs to be oxygenated.Arteries face high levels of blood 
pressure as they carry blood being pushed from the heart under great force. 
To withstand this pressure, the walls of the arteries are thicker, more elastic, 
and more muscular than those of other vessels. The largest arteries of the 
body contain a high percentage of elastic tissue that allows them to stretch 
and accommodate the pressure of the heart.Smaller arteries are more 
muscular in the structure of their walls.  
The smooth muscles of the arterial walls of these smaller arteries contract or 
expand to regulate the flow of blood through their lumen. In this way, the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 110 
 
body controls how much blood flows to different parts of the body under 
varying circumstances.  
The regulation of blood flow also affects blood pressure, as smaller arteries 
give blood less area to flow through and therefore increases the pressure of 
the blood on arterial walls.Arterioles are narrower arteries that branch off 
from the ends of arteries and carry blood to capillaries.  
They face much lower blood pressures than arteries due to their greater 
number, decreased blood volume, and distance from the direct pressure of 
the heart. Thus arteriole walls are much thinner than those of arteries. 
Arterioles, like arteries, are able to use smooth muscle to control their 
aperture and regulate blood flow and blood pressure. 
 
2. Capillaries: Capillaries are the smallest and thinnest of the blood vessels in 
the body and also the most common. They can be found running throughout 
almost every tissue of the body and border the edges of the body‘s a vascular 
tissues. Capillaries connect to arterioles on one end and venules on the 
other.Capillaries carry blood very close to the cells of the tissues of the body 
in order to exchange gases, nutrients, and waste products. The walls of 
capillaries consist of only a thin layer of endothelium so that there is the 
minimum amount of structure possible between the blood and the tissues. 
The endothelium acts as a filter to keep blood cells inside of the vessels 
while allowing liquids, dissolved gases, and other chemicals to diffuse along 
their concentration gradients into or out of tissues. Precapillary sphincters 
are bands of smooth muscle found at the arteriole ends of capillaries. These 
sphincters regulate blood flow into the capillaries. Since there is a limited 
supply of blood, and not all tissues have the same energy and oxygen 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 111 
 
requirements, the precapillary sphincters reduce blood flow to inactive 
tissues and allow free flow into active tissues. 
Capillaries contain small holes in their structure that allow oxygen and other 
nutrients to pass through into organs and tissues. Specific types of capillaries 
are determined by their functions, which affects their number and placement 
in the body. Capillaries are the smallest types of blood vessels in the body 
and operate as a network of many blood vessels woven together. They are 
most numerous in areas of the body that require a higher amount of oxygen 
and nutrient exchange 
 
3. Veins and Venules: Veins are the large return vessels of the body and act as 
the blood return counterparts of arteries. Because the arteries, arterioles, and 
capillaries absorb most of the force of the heart‘s contractions, veins and 
venules are subjected to very low blood pressures. This lack of pressure 
allows the walls of veins to be much thinner, less elastic, and less muscular 
than the walls of arteries. 
 
 
Veins rely on gravity, inertia, and the force of skeletal muscle contractions 
to help push blood back to the heart. To facilitate the movement of blood, 
some veins contain many one-way valves that prevent blood from flowing 
away from the heart. As skeletal muscles in the body contract, they squeeze 
nearby veins and push blood through valves closer to the heart. 
 
When the muscle relaxes, the valve traps the blood until another contraction 
pushes the blood closer to the heart. Venules are similar to arterioles as they 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 112 
 
are small vessels that connect capillaries, but unlike arterioles, venules 
connect to veins instead of arteries. Venules pick up blood from many 
capillaries and deposit it into larger veins for transport back to the heart. 
 
 
Coronary Circulation  
 
The heart has its own set of blood vessels that provide the myocardium with 
the oxygen and nutrients necessary to pump blood throughout the body. The 
left and right coronary arteries branch off from the aorta and provide blood 
to the left and right sides of the heart. The coronary sinus is a vein on the 
posterior side of the heart that returns deoxygenated blood from the 
myocardium to the vena cava. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 113 
 
 
Hepatic Portal Circulation 
 
The veins of the stomach and intestines perform a unique function: instead 
of carrying blood directly back to the heart, they carry blood to the 
liver through the hepatic portal vein. Blood leaving the digestive organs is 
rich in nutrients and other chemicals absorbed from food. The liver removes 
toxins, stores sugars, and processes the products of digestion before they 
reach the other body tissues. Blood from the liver then returns to the heart 
through the inferior vena cava. 
Blood 
The average human body contains about 4 to 5 liters of blood. As a liquid 
connective tissue, it transports many substances through the body and helps 
to maintain homeostasis of nutrients, wastes, and gases. Blood is made up of 
red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets, and liquid plasma. 
 Red Blood Cells: Red blood cells, also known as erythrocytes, are by far the 
most common type of blood cell and make up about 45% of blood volume. 
Erythrocytes are produced inside of red bone marrow from stem cells at the 
astonishing rate of about 2 million cells every second. The shape of 
erythrocytes is biconcave—disks with a concave curve on both sides of the 
disk so that the center of an erythrocyte is its thinnest part. The unique shape 
of erythrocytes gives these cells a high surface area to volume ratio and 
allows them to fold to fit into thin capillaries. Immature erythrocytes have a 
nucleus that is ejected from the cell when it reaches maturity to provide it 
with its unique shape and flexibility. The lack of a nucleus means that red 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 114 
 
blood cells contain no DNA and are not able to repair themselves once 
damaged. 
 
 
Erythrocytes transport oxygen in the blood through the red pigment 
hemoglobin. Hemoglobin contains iron and proteins joined to greatly 
increase the oxygen carrying capacity of erythrocytes. The high surface area 
to volume ratio of erythrocytes allows oxygen to be easily transferred into 
the cell in the lungs and out of the cell in the capillaries of the systemic 
tissues.  
 White Blood Cells: White blood cells, also known as leukocytes, make up a 
very small percentage of the total number of cells in the bloodstream, but 
have important functions in the body‘s immune system. There are two 
major classes of white blood cells: granular leukocytes and granular 
leukocytes. 
 
 General types of blood cells: (each has many different sub-types) 
 ERYTHROCYTES 
 (red cells) are small red disk shaped cells. They contain 
HAEMOGLOBIN, which combines with oxygen in the lungs and is 
then transported to the body's cells. The haemoglobin then returns 
carbon dioxide waste to the lungs. Erythrocytes are formed in the 
bone marrow in the knobby ends of bones. 
 LEUKOCYTES 
 (white cells) help the body fight bacteria and infection. When a tissue 
is damaged or has an infection the number of leukocytes increases. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 115 
 
Leukocytes are formed in the small ends of bones. Leukocytes can be 
classed as granular or non granular. There are three types of granular 
leukocytes (eosinophils, neutrophils, and basophils), and three types 
of non-granular (monocytes, T-cell lymphocytes, and B-cell 
lymphocytes). See also the  
THROMBOCYTES 
 (platelets) aid the formation of blood CLOTS by releasing various 
protein substances. When the body is injured thrombocytes 
disintegrate and cause a chemical reaction with the proteins found in 
plasma, which eventually create a thread like substance called 
FIBRIN. The fibrin then "catches" other blood cells which form the 
clot, preventing further loss of blood and forms the basis of healing. 
 Platelets: Also known as thrombocytes, platelets are small cell fragments 
responsible for the clotting of blood and the formation of scabs. Platelets 
form in the red bone marrow from large megakaryocyte cells that 
periodically rupture and release thousands of pieces of membrane that 
become the platelets. Platelets do not contain a nucleus and only survive in 
the body for up to a week before macrophages capture and digest them.  
 Plasma: Plasma is the non-cellular or liquid portion of the blood that makes 
up about 55% of the blood‘s volume. Plasma is a mixture of water, proteins, 
and dissolved substances. Around 90% of plasma is made of water, 
although the exact percentage varies depending upon the hydration levels of 
the individual. The proteins within plasma include antibodies and albumins. 
Antibodies are part of the immune system and bind to antigens on the 
surface of pathogens that infect the body. Albumins help maintain the 
body‘s osmotic balance by providing an isotonic solution for the cells of the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 116 
 
body. Many different substances can be found dissolved in the plasma, 
including glucose, oxygen, carbon dioxide, electrolytes, nutrients, and 
cellular waste products. The plasma functions as transportation medium for 
these substances as they move throughout the body. 
 
Functions of the Cardiovascular System  
 
Functions of the cardiovascular system. Blood circulates through a 
network of vessels throughout the body to provide individual cells with 
oxygen and nutrients and helps dispose of metabolic wastes. The 
heart pumps the blood around the blood vessels. 
The cardiovascular system is composed of the heart, blood and blood 
vessels. It connects all parts of the body through arteries and veins, arterioles 
and venules, and capillaries. Through this network, the blood delivers and 
expels nutrients, gases, waste products and chemical messengers throughout 
the body. Red blood cells transport oxygen, while white blood cells detect 
infections and kill foreign microbes and toxins. Clotting mechanisms further 
protect the body from blood loss when there‘s a wound. The cardiovascular 
system works alongside the respiratory system to deliver oxygen to the 
body‘s tissues and to remove carbon dioxide. It also helps maintain constant 
body temperature through the process thermoregulation. The sweat glands, 
smooth muscle around arterioles, skeletal muscle and endocrine glands all 
work together to keep a normal body temperature. Hormones, which are 
essential chemical signals used by the body to communicate with itself, are 
transported by the cardiovascular system to other parts of the body to deliver 
their message. Lastly, the cardiovascular system helps maintain fluid 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 117 
 
balance, which is important to ensure efficient movement of nutrients, gases 
and electrolytes in the cells. 
 
 
 
The cardiovascular system has three major functions: transportation of 
materials, protection from pathogens, and regulation of the body‘s 
homeostasis. 
 Transportation: The cardiovascular system transports blood to almost all of 
the body‘s tissues. The blood delivers essential nutrients and oxygen and 
removes wastes and carbon dioxide to be processed or removed from the 
body. Hormones are transported throughout the body via the blood‘s liquid 
plasma. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 118 
 
 Protection: The cardiovascular system protects the body through its white 
blood cells. White blood cells clean up cellular debris and fight pathogens 
that have entered the body. Platelets and red blood cells form scabs to seal 
wounds and prevent pathogens from entering the body and liquids from 
leaking out. Blood also carries antibodies that provide specific immunity to 
pathogens that the body has previously been exposed to or has been 
vaccinated against. 
 Regulation: The cardiovascular system is instrumental in the body‘s ability 
to maintain homeostatic control of several internal conditions. Blood vessels 
help maintain a stable body temperature by controlling the blood flow to the 
surface of the skin. Blood vessels near the skin‘s surface open during times 
of overheating to allow hot blood to dump its heat into the body‘s 
surroundings. In the case of hypothermia, these blood vessels constrict to 
keep blood flowing only to vital organs in the body‘s core. Blood also helps 
balance the body‘s pH due to the presence of bicarbonate ions, which act as 
a buffer solution. Finally, the albumins in blood plasma help to balance the 
osmotic concentration of the body‘s cells by maintaining an isotonic 
environment. 
 
Knowing the functions of the cardiovascular system and the parts of the 
body that are part of it is critical in understanding the physiology of the 
human body. With its complex pathways of veins, arteries, and capillaries, 
the cardiovascular system keeps life pumping through you. The heart, blood 
vessels, and blood help to transport vital nutrients throughout the body as 
well as remove metabolic waste. They also help to protect the body and 
regulate body temperature. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 119 
 
The cardiovascular system consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood. 
This system has three main functions: 
Transport of nutrients, oxygen, and hormones to cells throughout the body 
and removal of metabolic wastes (carbon dioxide, nitrogenous wastes). 
Protection of the body by white blood cells, antibodies, and complement 
proteins that circulate in the blood and defend the body against foreign 
microbes and toxins. Clotting mechanisms are also present that protect the 
body from blood loss after injuries. 
Regulation of body temperature, fluid pH, and water content of cells. 
The cardiovascular system, also known as the circulatory system, is 
composed of blood, blood vessels and the heart. The heart functions as a 
pump to move blood through the blood vessels of the body. A circulatory 
system is essential for large, multi-cellular organisms, such as humans and 
animals, and provide at least five major functions that are necessary for life. 
Transporting Oxygen and Removing Carbon Dioxide 
One of the most important functions of the circulatory system is to supply 
oxygen to all the cells in the body. Every cell in the body requires a constant 
supply of oxygen to stay alive. Because most of the cells are not in contact 
with air, the circulatory system must supply them with oxygen.  
When a person inhales, air enters the lungs, and oxygen is then absorbed 
across the membrane of the lungs into the bloodstream. This oxygen-rich 
blood is pumped through the heart to smaller and smaller blood vessels 
throughout the body. In the tiniest blood vessels, called capillaries, oxygen 
diffuses out of blood and into cells. At the same time, carbon dioxide 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 120 
 
produced by the cells is absorbed back into blood, which then returns to the 
lungs, releases carbon dioxide and picks up more oxygen. 
Transporting Nutrients and Removing Wastes 
A second critical function of the circulatory system is to supply all the cells 
in the body with nutrients and energy. After food is digested in the stomach, 
it migrates through the intestines, where nutrients from food are absorbed 
into the bloodstream. The blood also absorbs glucose, an energy source, 
from the liver, which is the body's glucose distribution center. These 
nutrients and energy are then transported to all the cells of the body, in a 
manner similar to the transport of oxygen. Blood also absorbs the waste 
products made by cells, and transports them to the excretory organs for 
removal from the body. 
Fighting Disease 
In addition to nutrients and oxygen, the blood also carries around important 
disease-fighting cells. The organs of the immune system, such as the spleen, 
create many types of specialized cells that can kill foreign cells trying to 
invade the body. The circulatory system is responsible for transporting these 
cells from the immune system to all other parts of the body. 
Transporting Hormones 
Hormones are crucial chemical signals that the body uses to communicate 
with itself. Hormones control many things such as growth, the reproductive 
cycle and glucose metabolism. Hormones are created in one part of the 
body, such as the brain or the liver, and then must be transported to another 
part of the body by the cardiovascular system in order to deliver their 
message. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 121 
 
Regulating Body Temperature 
The cardiovascular system also plays a role in regulating body temperature. 
If body temperature rises too high, blood vessels close to the skin dilate, 
increasing in size. The larger surface area of blood vessels close to the skin 
means more heat is conducted across the skin into the air. Conversely, if 
body temperature drops, the blood vessels constrict, decreasing in size. The 
smaller surface area of blood vessels next to the skin causes less heat to be 
lost across the skin and retains more heat in the body. 
 
 
1.   To transport nutrients, gases and waste products around the body 
2.   To protect the body from infection and blood loss 
3.   To 
help 
the 
body 
maintain 
a 
constant 
body 
temperature 
(‗thermoregulation‘) 
4.   To help maintain fluid balance within the body 
 
1. Transportation of nutrients, gases and waste products 
The cardiovascular system acts as an internal road network, linking all parts 
of the body via a system of highways (arteries and veins), main roads 
(arterioles and venules) and streets, avenues and lanes (capillaries).  
This network allows a non-stop courier system (the blood) to deliver and 
expel nutrients, gases, waste products and messages throughout the body. 
Nutrients such as glucose from digested carbohydrate are delivered from the 
digestive tract to the muscles and organs that require them for energy.  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 122 
 
Hormones (chemical messengers) from endocrine glands are transported by 
the cardiovascular system to their target organs, and waste products are 
transported to the lungs or urinary system to be expelled from the body. 
The cardiovascular system works in conjunction with the respiratory system 
to deliver oxygen to the tissues of the body and remove carbon dioxide.  In 
order to do this effectively the cardiovascular system is divided into two 
circuits, known as the pulmonary circuit and the systemic circuit. 
The pulmonary circuit is made up of the heart, lungs, pulmonary veins and 
pulmonary arteries.  This circuit pumps deoxygenated (blue) blood from the 
heart to the lungs where it becomes oxygenated (red) and returns to the 
heart. 
 
The systemic circuit is made up of the heart and all the remaining arteries, 
arterioles, capillaries, venules, and veins in the body.  
This circuit pumps oxygenated (red) blood from the heart to all the tissues, 
muscles and organs in the body, to provide them with the nutrients and gases 
they need in order to function. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 123 
 
After the oxygen has been delivered the systemic circuit picks up the carbon 
dioxide and returns this in the now deoxygenated (blue) blood, to the lungs, 
where it enters the pulmonary circuit to become oxygenated again. 
 
 
2. Protection from infection and blood loss 
Blood contains three types of cells as listed below and shown in the adjacent 
image. 
1.      Red blood cells 
2.      White blood cells 
3.      Platelets 
  
 
  
Red blood cells are responsible for transporting oxygen around the body to 
the tissues and organs that need it. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 124 
 
As oxygen enters the blood stream through the alveoli of the lungs it binds 
to a special protein in the red blood cells called haemoglobin.  This can be 
seen in the adjacent image. 
  
  
 
  
  
The job of white blood cells is to detect foreign bodies or infections and 
envelop and kill them, as seen in the below image. 
When they detect and kill an infection they create antibodies for that 
particular infection which enables the immune system to act more quickly 
against foreign bodies or infections it has come into contact with 
previously.                                                                                       
  
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 125 
 
 
Platelets are cells which are responsible for clotting the blood, they stick to 
foreign particles or objects such as the edges of a cut. 
Platelets connect to fibrinogen (a protein which is released in the site of the 
cut) producing a clump that blocks the hole in the broken blood vessel.  On 
an external wound this would become a scab. 
If the body has a low level of platelets then clotting may not occur and 
bleeding can continue.  
Excessive blood loss can be fatal – this is why people with a condition 
known as haemophilia (low levels or absence of platelets) need medication 
otherwise even minor cuts can become fatal as bleeding continues without a 
scab being formed.  
Alternatively, if platelet levels are excessively high then clotting within 
blood vessels can occur, leading to a stroke and or heart attack.  This is why 
people with a history of cardiac problems are often prescribed medication to 
keep their blood thin to minimise the risk of clotting within their blood 
vessels. 
 
3. Maintenance of constant body temperature (thermoregulation) 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 126 
 
The core temperature range for a healthy adult is considered to be between 
36.1°C and 37.8°C, with 37°C regarded as the average ‗normal‘ 
temperature.  
If the core temperature drops below this range it is known as hypothermia 
and if it rises above this range it is known as hyperthermia.  
As temperatures move further into hypo or hyperthermia they become life 
threatening.  Because of this the body works continuously to maintain its 
core temperature within the healthy range.  
This process of temperature regulation in known as thermoregulation and the 
cardiovascular system plays an integral part.  
Temperature changes within the body are detected by sensory receptors 
called thermo receptors, which in turn relay information about these changes 
to the hypothalamus in the brain.  
When a deviation in temperature is recorded the hypothalamus reacts by 
initiating certain mechanisms in order to regain a safe temperature 
range.  There are four sites where these adjustments in temperature can 
occur, they are: 
 
a. Sweat glands:  These glands are instructed to secrete sweat onto the 
surface of the skin when either the blood or skin temperature is detected to 
be above a normal safe temperature.  This allows heat to be lost through 
evaporation and cools the skin so blood that has been sent to the skin can in 
turn be cooled. 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 127 
 
 
b. Smooth muscle around arterioles:  Increases in temperature result in the 
smooth muscle in the walls of arterioles being stimulated to relax causing 
vasodilatation (increase in diameter of the vessel).  
This in turn increases the volume of blood flow to the skin, allowing cooling 
to occur.  We see this is in the adjacent diagram where blood that is 
normally concentrated around the core organs is shunted to the skin to cool 
when the body is under heat stress. 
  
  
 
If however the thermo receptors detect a cooling of the blood or skin then 
the hypothalamus reacts by sending a message to the smooth muscle of the 
arteriole walls causing the arterioles to vasoconstrict (reduce their diameter), 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 128 
 
thus reducing the blood flow to the skin and therefore helping to maintain 
core body temperature. 
c. Skeletal muscle:  When a drop in blood temperature is recorded the 
hypothalamus can also react by causing skeletal muscles to start 
shivering.  Shivering is actually lots of very fast, small muscular 
contractions which produce heat to help warm the blood 
d. Endocrine glands: The hypothalamus may trigger the release of 
hormones such as thyroxin, adrenalin and noradrenalin in response to drops 
in blood temperature.  These hormones all contribute to increasing the 
bodies metabolic rate (rate at which the body burns fuel) and therefore 
increasing the production of heat. 
 
4. Maintaining fluid balance within the body  
  
 
The cardiovascular system works in conjunction with other body systems 
(nervous and endocrine) to balance the body‘s fluid levels.  Fluid balance is 
essential in order to ensure sufficient and efficient movement of electrolytes, 
nutrients and gases through the body‘s cells. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 129 
 
When the fluid levels in the body do not balance a state of dehydration or 
hyperhydration can occur, both of which impede normal body function and 
if left unchecked can become dangerous or even fatal. 
 
Dehydration is the excessive loss of body fluid, usually accompanied by an 
excessive loss of electrolytes.  
The symptoms of dehydration include; headaches, cramps, dizziness, 
fainting and raised blood pressure (blood becomes thicker as its volume 
decreases requiring more force to pump it around the body).  
 
Hyper hydration on the other hand results from an excessive intake of water 
which pushes the normal balance of electrolytes outside of their safe 
limits.  This can occur through long bouts of intensive exercise where 
electrolytes are not replenished and excessive amounts of water are 
consumed.  
This can result in the recently consumed fluid rushing into the body‘s cells, 
causing tissues to swell.  If this swelling occurs in the brain it can put 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 130 
 
excessive pressure on the brain stem that may result in seizures, brain 
damage, coma or even death. 
Dehydration or a loss of body fluid (through sweat, urination, bleeding etc) 
results in an increase in ‗blood tonicity‘ (the concentration of substances 
within the blood) and a decrease in blood volume.  Where as hyperhydration 
or a gain in body fluid (intake of water) usually results in a reduction of 
blood tonicity and an increase in blood volume.  
 
Any change in blood tonicity and volume is detected by the kidneys and 
osmo receptors in the hypothalamus.  
Osmo receptors are specialist receptors that detect changes in the dilution of 
the blood.  Essentially they detect if we are hydrated (diluted blood) or 
dehydrated (less diluted blood). 
In response hormones are released and transported by the cardiovascular 
system (through the blood) to act on target tissues such as the kidneys to 
increase or decrease urine production.  Another way the cardiovascular 
system maintains fluid balance is by either dilating (widening) or 
constricting (tightening) blood vessels to increase or decrease the amount of 
fluid that can be lost through sweat. 
 
The Circulatory Pump  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 131 
 
 
The heart is a four-chambered ―double pump,‖ where each side (left and 
right) operates as a separate pump. The left and right sides of the heart are 
separated by a muscular wall of tissue known as the septum of the heart. The 
right side of the heart receives deoxygenated blood from the systemic veins 
and pumps it to the lungs for oxygenation. The left side of the heart receives 
oxygenated blood from the lungs and pumps it through the systemic arteries 
to the tissues of the body. Each heartbeat results in the simultaneous 
pumping of both sides of the heart, making the heart a very efficient pump. 
 
Blood pressure 
You should be able to interpret pressure changes in arteries, capillaries and 
veins. The chart shows how the pressure changes in the circulatory system - 
starting at the aorta [aorta: The major artery that leaves the left side of the 
heart, carrying oxygenated blood to the body tissues.]  leading from the left 
ventricle to the rest of the body, and back to the vena cava [vena cava: The 
major vein that carries deoxygenated blood to the right side of the heart 
from the body tissues.]  leading to the right atrium. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 132 
 
 
Pressure changes in the circulatory system 
 
Regulation of Blood Pressure  
 
Several functions of the cardiovascular system can control blood pressure. 
Certain hormones along with autonomic nerve signals from the brain affect 
the rate and strength of heart contractions. Greater contractile force and heart 
rate lead to an increase in blood pressure. Blood vessels can also affect 
blood pressure. Vasoconstriction decreases the diameter of an artery by 
contracting the smooth muscle in the arterial wall. The sympathetic (fight or 
flight) division of the autonomic nervous system causes vasoconstriction, 
which leads to increases in blood pressure and decreases in blood flow in the 
constricted region. Vasodilatation is the expansion of an artery as the smooth 
muscle in the arterial wall relaxes after the fight-or-flight response wears off 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 133 
 
or under the effect of certain hormones or chemicals in the blood. The 
volume of blood in the body also affects blood pressure. A higher volume of 
blood in the body raises blood pressure by increasing the amount of blood 
pumped by each heartbeat. Thicker, more viscous blood from clotting 
disorders can also raise blood pressure. 
Homeostasis 
Homeostasis, or the clotting of blood and formation of scabs, is managed by 
the platelets of the blood. Platelets normally remain inactive in the blood 
until they reach damaged tissue or leak out of the blood vessels through a 
wound. Once active, platelets change into a spiny ball shape and become 
very sticky in order to latch on to damaged tissues. Platelets next release 
chemical clotting factors and begin to produce the protein fibrin to act as 
structure for the blood clot. Platelets also begin sticking together to form a 
platelet plug. The platelet plug will serve as a temporary seal to keep blood 
in the vessel and foreign material out of the vessel until the cells of the blood 
vessel can repair the damage to the vessel wall. 
 
Blood groups and blood transfusion 
Blood transfusion is generally the process of receiving blood products into 
one's circulation intravenously. Transfusions are used for various medical 
conditions to replace lost components of the blood. Early transfusions 
used whole blood, but modern medical practice commonly uses only 
components of the blood, such as red blood cells, white blood 
cells, plasma, clotting factors, and platelets. 
Historically, 
red 
blood 
cell 
transfusion 
was 
considered 
when 
the hemoglobin level fell below 10 g/dL or hematocrit falls below 30% (the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 134 
 
"10/30 rule"). Because each unit of blood given carries risks, a trigger level 
lower than that at 7–8 g/dL is now usually used as it has been shown to have 
better patient outcomes. The administration of a single unit of blood is the 
standard for hospitalized people who are not bleeding, with this treatment 
then followed with re-assessment and consideration of symptoms and 
hemoglobin concentration. Patients with poor oxygen saturation may need 
more blood. The advisory caution to use blood transfusion only with more 
severe anemia is in part due to evidence that outcomes are worsened if larger 
amounts are given. One may consider transfusion for people with symptoms 
of cardiovascular disease such as chest pain or shortness of breath.[2] In cases 
where patients have low levels of hemoglobin but are cardiovascular 
stable, parenteral iron is a preferred option based on both efficacy and 
safety. Other blood products are given where appropriate, such as clotting 
deficiencies. 
 
BLOOD 
As blood moves throughout the body, it carries oxygen and nutrients to all 
the places they're needed. Blood also collects waste products, like carbon 
dioxide, and takes them to the organs responsible for making sure wastes 
leave the body. 
Blood is a mixture of cells and liquid. Each has a specific job: 
 Red blood cells carry oxygen to the body's tissues and remove carbon 
dioxide. Red blood cells make up about 40%-45% of a person's blood and 
live for 120 days. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 135 
 
 White blood cells are part of the immune system, and its main defense 
against infection. White blood cells make up less than 1% of a person's 
blood. 
 Platelets are cell fragments that help blood clot, which helps to prevent 
and control bleeding. A person's blood has about 1 platelet for every 20 
red blood cells. 
 Plasma is a pale yellow liquid mixture of water, proteins, electrolytes, 
carbohydrates, cholesterol, hormones, and vitamins. About 55% of our 
blood is plasma. 
Blood cells are made in the bone marrow (a spongy material inside many of 
the bones in the body). A full-grown adult has about 10 pints of blood 
(almost 5 liters) in his or her body. 
What Is a Blood Transfusion? 
 
 A transfusion is a simple medical procedure that doctors use to make up for 
a loss of blood — or for any part of the blood, such as red blood cells or 
platelets. 
A person usually gets a blood transfusion through an intravenous line, a 
tiny tube that is inserted into a vein with a small needle. The whole process 
takes about 1 to 4 hours, depending on how much blood is needed. 
Blood from a donor needs to match the blood type of the person receiving it. 
There are eight main blood types: 
1. O positive 
2. O negative 
3. A positive 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 136 
 
4. A negative 
5. B positive 
6. B negative 
7. AB positive 
8. AB negative 
In emergencies, there are exceptions to the rule that the donor's blood type 
must match the recipient's exactly. Blood type O negative is the only type of 
blood that people of all other blood types can receive. Medical teams use it 
in situations when patients need a transfusion but their blood type is 
unknown. Because of this, O negative donors are called "universal donors." 
People who have type AB blood are called "universal recipients" because 
they can safely receive any type of blood. 
A blood transfusion usually isn't whole blood — it could be any one of the 
blood's components. For example, chemotherapy can affect how bone 
marrow makes new blood cells. So some people getting treatment for cancer 
might need a transfusion of red blood cells or platelets. 
Other people might need plasma or only certain parts of plasma. People who 
have hemophilia, a disease that affects the blood's ability to clot, need 
plasma or the clotting factors contained in plasma to help their blood clot 
and prevent internal bleeding. 
 
Types of Blood Transfusions 
Red Blood Cell Transfusions A patient suffering from an iron deficiency or 
anemia, a condition where the body does not have enough red blood cells, 
may receive a Red Blood Cell Transfusion. This type of transfusion 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 137 
 
increases a patient‘s hemoglobin and iron levels, while improving the 
amount of oxygen in the body. 
Platelet Transfusions Platelets are a component of blood that stops the 
body from bleeding. Often patients suffering from leukemia, or other types 
of cancer, have lower platelet counts as a side effect of their chemotherapy 
treatments. Patients who have illnesses that prevent the body from making 
enough platelets have to get regular transfusions to stay healthy. 
Plasma Transfusions Plasma is the liquid part of the body‘s blood. It 
contains important proteins and other substances crucial to one‘s overall 
health. Plasma transfusions are used for patients with liver failure, severe 
infections, and serious burns. 
 
Clotting of blood 
Coagulation (also known as clotting) is the process by which blood 
changes from a liquid to a gel, forming a clot. It potentially results in 
homeostasis, the cessation of blood loss from a damaged vessel, followed by 
repair. 
Coagulation, in physiology, the process by which a blood clot is formed. 
The formation of a clot is often referred to as secondary homeostasis, 
because it forms the second stage in the process of arresting the loss of blood 
from a ruptured vessel. 
Platelets may stick to areas where the blood vessels are damaged and form 
blood clots. Vacuities also are a major cause of damage to the blood vessel 
walls. Diabetes. Diabetes external link icon increases the risk of plaque 
buildup in the arteries, which can cause dangerous blood clots. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 138 
 
How do you get a blood clot? 
 
DVT occurs when blood clots form in the deep veins of the legs or pelvis, 
and is often caused by: prolonged sitting or bed rest. surgery or trauma 
(especially hip surgery, gynecological surgery, heart surgery) medications 
such as estrogen, and birth control pills with higher levels of estrogen. 
Initiating the Clotting Process 
 A blood clot is a normal function of blood 
cells that is used to repair damaged blood 
vessel walls. Blood clots become a 
problem when the blood "clots" are in an 
artery or vein inappropriately. 
 Risk factors for developing blood clots in 
arteries 
include high 
blood 
pressure, cholesterol, 
diabetes, smoking, 
and family history. 
 Risk factors for developing blood clots in 
veins include prolonged immobility, including immobility after surgery, 
hormone therapy (including birth control pills), smoking, pregnancy, and 
genetic factors. 
 Causes of arterial blood clots include rupture of atherosclerosis 
plaques, embolus from another location, and artery injury. 
 Causes of venous blood blots include stasis and chemical factors that 
cause the blood to clot abnormally. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 139 
 
 Symptoms of blood clots depend upon their location and whether they 
occur in an artery or a vein. A blood clot in an artery that supplies blood 
to the heart or brain may result in 
o heart attack, 
o stroke, or 
o TIA (transient ischemic attack or mini-stroke) 
 When blood clots occur in a vein, symptoms may include 
o pain, 
o swelling, 
o warmth, and 
o redness. 
 If a forms in a vein in a leg or arm breaks; breaks off and travels to the 
lung a pulmonary embolus can occur. Symptoms of pulmonary 
embolism are chest pain and shortness of breath. 
 Blood clots are diagnosed initially by history and physical examination. 
Other tests may be ordered depending upon the location of the blood clot. 
 The treatment for blood clots depends upon the location, but most 
situations require the use of anticoagulant medications that thin the blood. 
 Medications used for blood clot treatment thin or anticoagulate the blood 
include: 
o apixaban (Eliquis) 
o rivaroxaban (Xarelto) 
o dabigatran (Pradaxa) 
o warfarin (Coumadin) 
o enoxaparin (Lovenox) 
 Complications of blood clots often depend upon their location. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 140 
 
 Blood clots can be prevented by remaining active especially after 
surgery, quitting smoking if you take birth control pills, controlling 
andhigh blood pressure, high cholesterol, and diabetes. 
 The prognosis for a person with a blood clot depends upon the health of 
the person, the location of the blood clot, and how quickly medical care is 
accessed. 
Picture of Blood Clots 
 
Picture of blood clotting 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 141 
 
Blood flows through the body in a continuous loop. Blood is pumped 
through the body by the heart, but that same blood returns back to the heart 
both by gravity and by muscles in the arms and legs contracting and 
squeezing, or milking, the blood back to the heart. If blood becomes 
stagnant, it may clot and cause potential life-threatening conditions. 
The medical term for a blood clot is a thrombus (plural: thrombi). An 
embolus refers to the situation in which the clot breaks away from its 
original location and travels through the bloodstream to another location. 
There are four potential outcomes regarding a blood clot. It will either 
1. grow, 
2. dissolve, 
3. embolize, or 
4. recannulate (a situation in which capillary blood vessels proliferate 
within the clot to form new channels so that blood may resume flow) 
Cardiac Cycle 
The cardiac cycle refers to a complete heartbeat from its generation to the 
beginning of the next beat, and so includes the diastole, the systole, and the 
intervening pause. The frequency of the cardiac cycle is described by 
the heart rate, which is typically expressed as beats per minute 
The cardiac cycle is the sequence of events that occurs when the heart beats. 
There are two phases of the cardiac cycle. In the diastole phase, the 
heart ventricles are relaxed and the heart fills with blood. In the systole 
phase, the ventricles contract and pump blood to the arteries. One cardiac 
cycle is completed when the heart fills with blood and the blood is pumped 
out of the heart. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 142 
 
The events of the cardiac cycle described below trace the path of the blood 
as it enters the heart, is pumped to the lungs, travels back to the heart and is 
pumped out to the rest of the body. It is important to note that the events that 
occur in the first and second diastole phases actually happen at the same 
time. The same is also true for the events of the first and second systole 
phases. 
The cardiac cycle refers to a complete heartbeat from its generation to the 
beginning of the next beat, and so includes the diastole, the systole, and the 
intervening pause. The frequency of the cardiac cycle is described by the 
heart rate, which is typically expressed as beats per minute. 
 
Cardiac cycle a complete cardiac movement, or heart beat, including systole
, diastole, and the intervening pause. 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 143 
 
Cardiac Cycle: 1st Diastole Phase 
During the diastole phase, the atria and ventricles are relaxed and the atrio 
ventricular valves are open. De-oxygenated blood from the superior and 
inferior vena cavae flows into the right atrium. The open atrioventricular 
valves allow blood to pass through to the ventricles. The SA nodecontracts 
triggering the atria to contract. The right atrium empties its contents into the 
right ventricle. The tricuspid valve prevents the blood from flowing back 
into the right atrium. 
 
Cardiac Cycle: 1st Systole Phase 
During the systole phase, the right ventricle receives impulses from 
the Purkinje fibers and contracts. 
The atrioventricular valves close and the semilunar valves open. The de-
oxygenated blood is pumped into the pulmonary artery. The pulmonary 
valve prevents the blood from flowing back into the right ventricle. 
The pulmonary artery carries the blood to the lungs. There the blood picks 
up oxygen and is returned to the left atrium of the heart by the pulmonary 
veins. 
Cardiac Cycle: 2nd Diastole Phase 
In the next diastole period, the semi lunar valves close and the 
atrioventricular valves open. Blood from the pulmonary veins fills the 
left atrium. (Blood from the vena cava is also filling the right atrium.) The 
SA node contracts again triggering the atria to contract. The left atrium 
empties its contents into the left ventricle. The mitral valve prevents the 
oxygenated blood from flowing back into the left atrium. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 144 
 
Cardiac Cycle: 2nd Systole Phase 
During the following systole phase, the atrio ventricular valves close and the 
semi lunar valves open. The left ventricle receives impulses from the 
Purkinje fibers and contracts. Oxygenated blood is pumped into the aorta. 
The aortic valve prevents the oxygenated blood from flowing back into the 
left ventricle. 
The aorta branches out to provide oxygenated blood to all parts of the body. 
The oxygen depleted blood is returned to the heart via the vena cavae. 
Cardiovascular System 
The cardiac cycle is vital to proper cardiovascular system function. 
Comprised of the heart and the circulatory system, the cardiovascular system 
transports nutrients to and removes gaseous waste from the cells of the body. 
The heart and its cardiac cycle provide the "muscle" needed to pump blood 
throughout the body, while blood vessels act as pathways to transport blood 
to its destination. The driving force behind the cardiac cycle is cardiac 
conduction. Cardiac conduction is the electrical system that powers the 
cardiac cycle and the cardiovascular system. It is what causes the 
heart muscle to contract, sending nerve impulses that travel throughout the 
heart wall. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 145 
 
 
 
Lymph and Lymphatic circulation. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 146 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 147 
 
The lymphatic system is a network of tissues and organs that help rid the 
body of toxins, waste and other unwanted materials. The primary function of 
the lymphatic system is to transport lymph, a fluid containing infection-
fighting white blood cells, throughout the body.  
The lymphatic system primarily consists of lymphatic vessels, which are 
similar to the circulatory system's veins and capillaries. The vessels are 
connected to lymph nodes, where the lymph is filtered. The tonsils, 
adenoids, spleen and thymus are all part of the lymphatic system. 
There are hundreds of lymph nodes in the human body. They are located 
deep inside the body, such as around the lungs and heart, or closer to the 
surface, such as under the arm or groin. 
The spleen, which is located on the left side of the body just above the 
kidney, is the largest lymphatic organ, according to the U.S. National 
Library of Medicine (NLM). It controls the amount of red blood cells and 
blood storage in the body, and helps to fight infection. If the spleen detects 
potentially dangerous bacteria, viruses, or other microorganisms in the 
blood, it — along with the lymph nodes — creates white blood cells called 
lymphocytes, which act as defenders against invaders. The lymphocytes 
produce antibodies to kill the foreign microorganisms and stop infections 
from spreading. Humans can live without a spleen, although people who 
have lost their spleen to disease or injury are more prone to infections. 
 
The thymus is located in the chest just above the heart. This small organ 
stores immature lymphocytes (specialized white blood cells) and prepares 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 148 
 
them to become active T cells, which help destroy infected or cancerous 
cells.  
Tonsils are large clusters of lymphatic cells found in the pharynx. According 
to the American Academy of Otolaryngology, they are the body's "first line 
of defense as part of the immune system. They sample bacteria and viruses 
that enter the body through the mouth or nose." They sometimes become 
infected, and although tonsillectomies occur much less frequently today then 
they did in the 1950s, it is still among the most common operations 
performed and typically follows frequent throat infections. 
Lymph is a clear and colorless fluid; the word "lymph" comes from the Latin 
word lympha, which means "connected to water," 
The lymphatic system is responsible for the following: 
 Cleansing the cellular environment 
 Returning proteins and tissue fluids to the blood 
 Providing a pathway for the absorption of fats into the bloodstream 
 Defending the body against disease 
The lymphatic system is composed of lymph (or interstitial fluid), lymph 
vessels, lymph nodes, lymph organs (e.g. tonsils, adenoids, appendix, 
spleen,, thymus gland, and patches of tissue in the intestines called Peyer 
patches), and lymphoid tissue. Monocytes and lymphocytes pass from the 
bloodstream through the blood capillary walls into the spaces between the 
cells in the body. When they pass into this lymph or interstitial fluid that 
surrounds cells, they perform their protective functions. Monocytes change 
into macrophages, destroy pathogens, and collect debris from damaged 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 149 
 
cells. Lymphocytes are much more complicated and are essential to the 
immune response, so they are discussed in the next section. Once monocytes 
and lymphocytes pass into the lymphatic capillaries, the fluid is 
termed lymph or lymphatic fluid. 
  
 
  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 150 
 
  
Lymph moves in one directo to prevent pathogens from flowing through the 
entire body. The system filters out the microorganisms as the lymph passes 
through its various capillaries, vessels, and nodes. Lymph travels in the 
following sequence: 
1. From the interstitial spaces between the cells, then 
2. Toward the heart through lymphatic capillaries. 
3. To lymphatic vessels that carry lymph using a valvular system. 
4. To the lymphatic nodes, which are also called lymph glands, that 
filter the debris that has been collected through the use of 
macrophages. These nodes can become enlarged when pathogens are 
present. Note the major lymph nodes in the figure, including the 
cervical, axillary, inguinal , and mediastinal nodes. 
5. Then to either the right lymphatic duct or the thoracic duct, both of 
which empty into the large subclavian veins in the neck. 
6. Once in the venous blood, the lymph is then recycled through the 
body through the circulatory system. 
The organs in the lymphatic system are the spleen, the thymus gland, the 
tonsils, the appendix, and Peyer's patches. the spleen is located in the upper 
left quadrant and serves to filter, store, and produce blood cells; remove 
RBCs; and activate B lymphocytes. The thymus gland is located is located in 
the mediastinum and is instrumental in the development of T lymphocytes 
(T cells). the tonsils are lymphatic tissue (lingual, pharyngeal, and palatine) 
that helps protect the entrance to the respiratory and digestive systems. The 
vermiform appendix and Peyer patches are lymphoid tissue in the intestines. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 151 
 
 
THE 
LYMPHATIC 
SYSTEM 
IS 
COOPERATIVE 
 The 
lymphatic 
system 
aids the immune system 
in removing 
and 
destroying waste, debris, 
dead 
blood 
cells, 
pathogens, toxins, 
and 
cancer cells. 
 The lymphatic system absorbs fats and fat-soluble vitamins from the 
digestive system and delivers these nutrients to the cells of the body where 
they are used by the cells. 
 The lymphatic system also removes excess fluid, and waste products from 
the interstitial spaces between the cells. 
THE TRANSFORMATION 
Arterial blood carries oxygen, nutrients, and hormones for the cells. To 
reach these cells it leaves the small arteries and flows into the tissues. This 
fluid is now known as interstitial fluid and it delivers its nourshing products 
to the cells. Then it leaves the cell and removes waste products. 
After this task is complete, 90% of this fluid returns to the circulatory 
system as venous blood. 
WHAT IS LYMPH? 
The remaining 10% of the fluid that stays behind in the tissues as a clear to 
yellowish fluid known as lymph. 
 
Major lymphatic ducts. (Courtesy of NIH/NCI) 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 152 
 
 Unlike blood, which flows throughout the body in a continue loop, lymph 
flows in only one direction within its own system. This flow is only 
upward toward the neck. Here, it flows into the venous blood stream 
through the subclavien veins which are located on either sides of the neck 
near the collarbones. 
 After plasma has delivered its nutrients and removed debris, it leaves the 
cells. 90% of this fluid returns to the venous circulation through the 
venules and continues as venous blood. 
 The remaining 10% of this fluid becomes lymph which is a watery fluid 
that contains waste products. This waste is protein-rich due to the 
undigested proteins that were removed from the cells. 
LYMPHATIC CIRCULATION 
The lymph is moved through the body in its own vessels making a one-way 
journey from the interstitial spaces to the subclavian veins at the base of the 
neck. 
 Since the lymphatic system does not have a heart to pump it, its upward 
movement depends on the motions of the muscle and joint pumps. 
 As it moves upward toward the neck the lymph passes through lymph 
nodes which filter it  to remove debris and pathogens.  
 The cleansed lymph continues to travel in only one direction, which is 
upward toward the neck. 
 At the base of the neck, the cleansed lymph flows into the subclavian 
veins on either side of the neck.  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 153 
 
 
Lymph 
returning 
to 
the  
subclavian veins. © Lymph Notes 
THE ORIGIN OF LYMPH 
Lymph originates as plasma (the fluid portion of blood). The arterial blood, 
which flows out of the heart, slows as it moves through a capillary bed. This 
slowing allows some plasma to leave the arterioles (small arteries) and flow 
into the tissues where it becomes tissue fluid. 
 Also known as extracellular fluid, this is fluid that flows between the cells 
but is not into the cells. This fluid delivers nutrients, oxygen, and hormones 
to the cells. 
 As this fluid leaves the cells, it takes with it cellular waste products and 
protein cells. 
 Approximately 90% of this tissue fluid flows into the small veins. Here it 
enters the venous circulation as plasma and continues in the circulatory 
system. 
 The remaining 10% of the fluid that is left behind is known as lymph. 
LYMPHATIC CAPILLARIES 
In order to leave the tissues, the lymph must enter the lymphatic system 
through specialized lymphatic capillaries. Approximately 70% of these 
are superficial capillaries located near, or just under, the skin. The 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 154 
 
remaining 30%, which are known as deep lymphatic capillaries, surround 
most of the body‘s organs. 
Lymphatic capillaries begin as blind-ended tubes that are only a single cell 
in thickness. These cells are arranged in a slightly overlapping pattern, much 
like the shingles on a roof. Each of these individual cells is fastened to 
nearby tissues by an anchoring filament. 
LYMPHATIC VESSELS 
The lymphatic capillaries gradually join together to form a mesh-like 
network of tubes that are located deeper in the body. 
 As they become larger, and deeper, these structures become lymphatic 
vessels. 
 Deeper within the body the lymphatic vessels become progressively larger 
and are located near major blood veins. 
 Like veins, the lymphatic vessels, which are known as lymphangions, have 
one-way valves to prevent any backward flow. 
 Smooth muscles in the walls of the lymphatic vessels cause the angions to 
contract sequentially to aid the flow of lymph upward toward the thoracic 
region. Because of their shape, these vessels are previously referred to as a 
string of pearls. 
LYMPH NODES  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 155 
 
 
Lymph 
nodes 
kill 
pathogens 
and 
cancer 
cells. 
They 
also 
 remove debris and excess fluids.  
There are between 600-700 lymph nodes present in the average human body. 
It is the role of these nodes to filter the lymph before it can be returned to the 
circulatory system. Although these nodes can increase or decrease in size 
throughout life, any nodes that has been damaged or destroyed, does not 
regenerate. 
 Afferent lymphatic vessels carry unfiltered lymph into the node. Here waste 
products, and some of the fluid, are filtered out. 
 In another section of the node, lymphocytes, which are specialized white 
blood cells, kill any pathogens that may be present. This causes the 
swelling commonly known as swollen glands. 
 Lymph nodes also trap and destroy cancer cells to slow the spread of the 
cancer until they are overwhelmed by it. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 156 
 
 Efferent lymphatic vessels carry the filtered lymph out of the node so that it 
can continue its return to the circulatory system. 
DRAINAGE AREAS 
Lymphatic system drainage is organized into two separate, and very unequal 
drainage areas. The right drainage area clears the right arm and chest. The 
left drainage area clears all of the other areas of the body including both 
legs, the lower trunk upper left of the chest, and the left arm. 
 
Lymphatic Drainage Areas 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 157 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 158 
 
Lymphatic circulation 
 
The lymphatic system can be thought of as a drainage system needed 
because, as blood circulates through the body, blood plasma leaks into 
tissues through the thin walls of the capillaries. The portion of blood plasma 
that escapes is called interstitial or extracellular fluid, and it contains 
oxygen, glucose, amino acids, and other nutrients needed bytissue cells. 
Although most of this fluid seeps immediately back into the bloodstream, a 
percentage of it, along with the particulate matter, is left behind. The 
lymphatic system removes this fluid and these materials from tissues, 
returning them via the lymphatic vessels to the bloodstream, and thus 
prevents a fluid imbalance that would result in the organism‘s death. 
The fluid and proteins within the tissues begin their journey back to the 
bloodstream by passing into tiny lymphatic capillaries that infuse almost 
every tissue of the body. Only a few regions, including the epidermis of the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 159 
 
skin, the mucous membranes, the bone marrow, and the central nervous 
system, are free of lymphatic capillaries, whereas regions such as the lungs, 
gut, genitourinary system, and dermis of the skin are densely packed with 
these vessels. Once within the lymphatic system, the extracellular fluid, 
which is now called lymph, drains into larger vessels called the lymphatics. 
These vessels converge to form one of two large vessels called lymphatic 
trunks, which are connected to veins at the base of the neck. One of these 
trunks, the right lymphatic duct, drains the upper right portion of the body, 
returning lymph to the bloodstream via the right subclavian vein. The other 
trunk, the thoracic duct, drains the rest of the body into the left subclavian 
vein. 
Lymph 
is 
transported 
along 
the 
system 
of 
vessels 
by muscle contractions, and valves prevent lymph from flowing backward. 
The lymphatic vessels are punctuated at intervals by small masses of lymph 
tissue, called lymph nodes, that remove foreign materials such as infectious 
microorganisms from the lymph filtering through them. 
 
In addition to serving as a drainage network, the lymphatic system helps 
protect the body against infection by producing white blood cells 
calledlymphocytes, 
which 
help 
rid 
the 
body 
of 
disease-causing 
microorganisms. The organs and tissues of the lymphatic system are the 
major sites of production, differentiation, and proliferation of two types of 
lymphocytes—the T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes, also called T 
cells and B cells. Although lymphocytes are distributed throughout the body, 
it is within the lymphatic system that they are most likely to encounter 
foreign microorganisms. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 160 
 
Lymphoid organs 
The lymphatic system is commonly divided into the primary lymphoid 
organs, which are the sites of B and T cell maturation, and the secondary 
lymphoid organs, in which further differentiation of lymphocytes occurs. 
Primary lymphoid organs include the thymus, bone marrow, fetal liver, and, 
in birds, a structure called the bursa of Fabricius. In humans 
the thymus and bone marrow are the key players in immune function. All 
lymphocytes derive from stem cells in the bone marrow. Stem cells destined 
to become B lymphocytes remain in the bone marrow as they mature, while 
prospective T cells migrate to the thymus to undergo further growth. Mature 
B and T lymphocytes exit the primary lymphoid organs and are transported 
via the bloodstream to the secondary lymphoid organs, where they become 
activated by contact with foreign materials, such as particulate matter and 
infectious agents, called antigens in this context. 
Thymus 
The thymus is located just behind the sternum in the upper part of the chest. 
It is a bilobed organ that consists of an outer, lymphocyte-rich cortex and an 
inner medulla. The differentiation of T cells occurs in the cortex of the 
thymus. In humans the thymus appears early in fetal development and 
continues to grow until puberty, after which it begins to shrink. The decline 
of the thymus is believed to be the reason T-cell production decreases with 
age. 
In the cortex of the thymus, developing T cells, called thymocytes, come to 
distinguish between the body‘s own components, referred to as ―self,‖ and 
those substances foreign to the body, called ―nonself.‖ This occurs when the 
thymocytes undergo a process called positive selection, in which they are 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 161 
 
exposed to self molecules that belong to the major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC). Those cells capable of recognizing the body‘s MHC 
molecules are preserved, while those that cannot bind these molecules are 
destroyed. The thymocytes then move to the medulla of the thymus, where 
further differentiation occurs. There thymocytes that have the ability to 
attack the body‘s own tissues are destroyed in a process called negative 
selection. Positive and negative selection destroy a great number of 
thymocytes; only about 5 to 10 percent survive to exit the thymus. Those 
that survive leave the thymus through specialized passages called efferent 
(outgoing) lymphatics, which drain to the blood and secondary lymphoid 
organs. The thymus has no afferent (incoming) lymphatics, which supports 
the idea that the thymus is a T-cell factory rather than a rest stop for 
circulating lymphocytes. 
Bone marrow 
In birds B cells mature in the bursa of Fabricius. (The process of B-cell 
maturation was elucidated in birds—hence B for bursa.) In mammals the 
primary organ for B-lymphocyte development is the bone marrow, although 
the prenatal site of B-cell differentiation is the fetal liver. Unlike the thymus, 
the bone marrow does not atrophy at puberty, and therefore there is no 
concomitant decrease in the production of B lymphocytes with age. 
Secondary lymphoid organs 
Secondary lymphoid organs include the lymph nodes, spleen, and small 
masses of lymph tissue such as Peyer‘s patches, the appendix, tonsils, and 
selected regions of the body‘s mucosal surfaces (areas of the body lined with 
mucous membranes). The secondary lymphoid organs serve two basic 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 162 
 
functions: they are a site of further lymphocyte maturation, and they 
efficiently trap antigens for exposure to T and B cells. 
LYMPH NODES 
The lymph nodes, or lymph glands, are small, encapsulated bean-shaped 
structures composed of lymphatic tissue. Thousands of lymph nodes are 
found throughout the body along the lymphatic routes, and they are 
especially prevalent in areas around the armpits (axillary nodes), groin 
(inguinal nodes), neck (cervical nodes), and knees (popliteal nodes). The 
nodes contain lymphocytes, which enter from the bloodstream via 
specialized vessels called the high endothelial venules. T cells congregate in 
the inner cortex (paracortex), and B cells are organized in germinal centres 
in the outer cortex. Lymph, along with antigens, drains into the node through 
afferent (incoming) lymphatic vessels and percolates through the lymph 
node, where it comes in contact with and activates lymphocytes. Activated 
lymphocytes, carried in the lymph, exit the node through the efferent 
(outgoing) vessels and eventually enter the bloodstream, which distributes 
them throughout the body. 
SPLEEN 
The spleen is found in the abdominal cavity behind the stomach. Although 
structurally similar to a lymph node, the spleen filters blood rather than 
lymph. One of its main functions is to bring blood into contact with 
lymphocytes. The functional tissue of the spleen is made up of two types of 
cells: the red pulp, which contains cells called macrophages that remove 
bacteria, old blood cells, and debris from the circulation; and surrounding 
regions of white pulp, which contain great numbers of lymphocytes. The 
splenic artery enters the red pulp through a web of small blood vessels, and 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 163 
 
blood-borne microorganisms are trapped in this loose collection of cells until 
they are gradually washed out through the splenic vein. The white pulp 
contains both B and T lymphocytes. T cells congregate around the tiny 
arterioles that enter the spleen, while B cells are located in regions called 
germinal centres, where the lymphocytes are exposed to antigens and 
induced to differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells. 
 
MUCOSA-ASSOCIATED TISSUES 
Another group of important secondary lymphoid structures is the mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissues. These tissues are associated with mucosal 
surfaces of almost any organ, but especially those of the digestive, 
genitourinary, and respiratory tracts, which are constantly exposed to a wide 
variety of potentially harmful microorganisms and therefore require their 
own system of antigen capture and presentation to lymphocytes. For 
example, Peyer‘s patches, which are mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues of 
the small intestine, sample passing antigens and expose them to underlying 
B and T cells. Other, less-organized regions of the gut also play a role as 
secondary lymphoid tissue. 
Diseases of the lymphatic system 
The host of secondary lymphoid organs provides a system of redundancy for 
antigen sampling by the cells of the immune system. Removal of the spleen, 
selected lymph nodes, tonsils, or appendix does not generally result in an 
excessive increase in disease caused by pathogenic microorganisms. 
However, the importance of the primary lymphoid organs is clear. For 
example, two autoimmune diseases, DiGeorge syndrome and Nezelof‘s 
disease, result in the failure of the thymus to develop and in the subsequent 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 164 
 
reduction in T-cell numbers, and removal of the bursa from chickens results 
in a decrease in B-cell counts. The destruction of bone marrow also has 
devastating effects on the immune system, not only because of its role as the 
site of B-cell development but also because it is the source of the stem cells 
that are the precursors for lymphocyte differentiation. 
 
The Respiratory system: 
The respiratory system (called also respiratory apparatus, ventilator 
system) is a biological system consisting of specific organs and structures 
used for the process of respiration in an organism. There are 3 major parts 
of the respiratory system: the airway, the lungs, and the muscles of 
respiration. 
The 
airway, 
which 
includes 
the 
nose, 
mouth, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles, carries air 
between the lungs and the body's exterior. 
What 
is 
the 
respiratory 
system? 
     Your respiratory system is made up of the 
organs in your body that help you to breathe. 
Remember, that Respiration = Breathing. The 
goal of breathing is to deliver oxygen to the 
body and to take away carbon dioxide. 
Parts of the respiratory system 
Lungs 
     The lungs are the main organs of the 
respiratory system. In the lungs oxygen is 
taken into the body and carbon dioxide is 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 165 
 
breathed out. The red blood cells are 
responsible for picking up the oxygen in the 
lungs and carrying the oxygen to all the body 
cells that need it. The red blood cells drop off 
the oxygen to the body cells, then pick up the 
carbon dioxide which is a waste gas product 
produced by our cells. The red blood cells 
transport the carbon dioxide back to the lungs 
and we breathe it out when we exhale. 
 
 
Trachea 
     The trachea (TRAY-kee-uh} is sometimes called the windpipe. The 
trachea filters the air we breathe and branches into the bronchi. 
Bronchi 
     The bronchi (BRAHN-ky) are two air tubes that branch off of the trachea 
and carry air directly into the lungs. 
Diaphragm 
     Breathing starts with a dome-shaped muscle at the bottom of the lungs 
called the diaphragm (DY-uh-fram). When you breathe in, the diaphragm 
contracts. When it contracts it flattens out and pulls downward. This 
movement enlarges the space that the lungs are in. This larger space pulls air 
into the lungs. When you breathe out, the diaphragm expands reducing the 
amount of space for the lungs and forcing air out. The diaphragm is the main 
muscle used in breathing. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 166 
 
Respiration 
is 
the 
physiological 
process 
by 
which 
organisms 
supply oxygen to their cells and the cells use that oxygen to produce 
high energy molecules. Respiration occurs in all types of organisms, 
including bacteria, protists, fungi, plants, and animals. In higher animals, 
respiration is often separated into three separate components: (a) external 
respiration, the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the 
environment and the organism; (b) internal respiration, the exchange of 
oxygen and carbon dioxide between the internal body fluids, such as blood, 
and individual cells; and (c) cellular respiration, the biochemical oxidation 
of glucose and consequent synthesis of ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 
. Respiration - External Respiration 
External respiration, commonly known as breathing, is the exchange of 
oxygen and carbon dioxide between an animal and its environment. Most 
animals use specialized organs or organ systems, such as lungs, trachea, or 
gills, for external respiration. In all cases, exchange of gases between the 
environment and an animal occurs by diffusion through a wet surface on the 
animal which is permeable to oxy… 
Respiration - Internal Respiration 
Internal respiration is the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between 
blood and cells in different tissues of an animal's body. Internal respiration 
occurs in animals with a circulation system (categories 2, 4, and 5 above). 
Animals with gills or lungs take up oxygen and transport oxygen-rich blood 
throughout the body; they transport carbon dioxide-rich blood from the body 
back into the… 
Respiration - Cellular Respiration 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 167 
 
Cellular respiration consists of many separate enzymatic reactions. The 
entire process can be summarized in the chemical equation: Cellular 
respiration is divided into three sequential series of reactions: glycolysis, the 
citric acid cycle, and the electron transport chain. In higher organisms 
(eukaryotes), glycolysis occurs in the cytosol of the cell, the aqueous region 
outside the nucleus; … 
Respiration - Glycolysis 
Glycolysis can be defined simply as the lysis, or splitting, of sugar. More 
particularly, it is the controlled breakdown of glucose, a 6-carbon 
carbohydrate, into pyruvate, a 3-carbon carbohydrate. Organisms frequently 
store complex carbohydrates, such as glycogen or starch, and break these 
down into glucose units which can then enter into glycolysis. Two features 
of glycolysis suggest that it has… 
Respiration - Cirtric Acid Cycle 
After pyruvate (a 3-carbon molecule) is synthesized by glycolysis, it moves 
into the mitochondria and is oxidized to form carbon dioxide (a 1-carbon 
molecule) and acetyl CoA (a two carbon molecule). Cells can also make 
acetyl CoA from fats and amino acids and this is how cells often derive 
energy, in the form of ATP, from molecules other than glucose or complex 
carbohydrates. After acetyl CoA form… 
Respiration - Electron Transfer Chain 
The electron transfer chain is the final series of biochemical reactions in 
cellular respiration. It consists of a series of organic electron carriers 
associated with the inner membrane of the mitochondria. Cytochromes are 
among the most important of these electron carriers. Like hemoglobin, 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 168 
 
cytochromes are colored proteins which contain iron in a nitrogen-
containing heme group. The final electron… 
Respiration - Anaerobic Respiration 
The above reactions of cellular respiration are often referred to as aerobic 
respiration because the final series of reactions, the electron transfer chain, 
require oxygen as an electron acceptor. When oxygen is absent or in short 
supply, cells may rely upon glycolysis alone for their supply of ATP. 
Glycolysis presumably originated in primitive cells early in Earth's history 
when very littl… 
Respiration - Efficiency of Cellular Respiration 
One can easily determine the energy efficiency of cellular respiration by 
calculating the standard free energy change, a thermodynamic quantity, 
between the reactants and products. On this basis, biochemists often quote 
the overall efficiency of cellular respiration as about 40%, with the 
additional 60% of the energy given off as heat. However, many cells 
regulate the different enzymes of respirat… 
The respiratory system plays a vital role in the body, by providing 
your cells with much needed oxygen, as well as excreting carbon 
dioxide, which can be deadly if allowed to accumulate. The three 
major parts of the respiratory system are the airways, the lungs, and 
the muscles of respiration.  This article will explain anatomy of  the 
respiratory system, detailing the organs involved as well as the things 
that can go wrong. 
Anatomy of Respiratory System: Organs and Functions 
The three major parts of the respiratory system all work together to 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 169 
 
carry out their task. The airways (nose, mouth, pharynx, larynx etc.) 
allow air to enter the body and into the lungs. The lungs work to pass 
oxygen into the body, whilst removing carbon dioxide from the body. 
The muscles of respiration, such as the diaphragm, work in unison to 
pump air into and out of the lungs whilst breathing. 
 
Respiratory 
Organs 
Description 
Function 
Nose 
and 
Nasal 
Cavity 
The nose is the 
primary opening 
for the respiratory 
system, made of 
bone, muscle, and 
cartilage. 
The 
nasal cavity is a 
cavity 
within 
your nose filled 
The nose is used 
to inhale air into 
the body. The 
nasal 
cavity 
warms the air as 
it enters, acting 
as filtration and 
purifying the air 
by 
removing 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 170 
 
with 
mucus 
membranes 
and 
hairs. 
any dust, pollen, 
and 
other 
contaminants, 
before it passed 
to 
the 
inner 
body. 
Mouth 
Also called the 
oral cavity, the 
mouth 
is 
the 
secondary 
exterior opening 
for the respiratory 
system. 
Most 
commonly, 
the 
majority 
of 
respiration 
is 
achieved via the 
nose and nasal 
cavity, 
but 
the 
mouth 
can 
be 
used if needed. 
Inhaling 
air 
through 
the 
mouth 
allows 
more inhalation, 
as 
the 
oral 
cavity 
is 
far 
larger than the 
nasal 
cavity. 
The air also has 
less distance to 
travel, meaning 
more 
air 
can 
enter your body 
and 
be 
used 
faster. The oral 
cavity has no 
hairs or filtering 
techniques, 
meaning the air 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 171 
 
you inhale does 
not undergo the 
filtration 
process. 
Pharynx 
Also called the 
throat, 
the 
pharynx 
is 
a 
funnel of muscle 
that extends from 
the 
respiratory 
openings to the 
esophagus 
and 
larynx. 
Air 
that 
is 
inhaled 
enters 
the 
pharynx, 
where 
it 
descends 
into 
the larynx via a 
diversion from 
the 
epiglottis. 
As the pharynx 
is 
used 
for 
swallowing 
food as well as 
breathing, 
the 
epiglottis 
ensures that air 
can pass into the 
trachea, and that 
food enters the 
esophagus. 
Larynx 
Also known as 
the voice box, the 
Aside 
from 
allowing us the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 172 
 
larynx is situated 
below 
the 
pharynx, in the 
anterior 
portion 
of the neck. 
ability 
of 
speech, 
the 
larynx also acts 
as 
a 
defense 
mechanism. 
If 
any food passes 
into 
the 
esophagus when 
swallowing, the 
larynx produces 
a strong cough 
reflex. 
Trachea 
Also known as 
the wind pipe, the 
trachea is a tube 
made of cartilage 
rings 
that 
are 
lined 
with 
pseudostratified 
ciliated columnar 
epithelium. 
The 
main 
respiratory 
function of the 
trachea 
is 
to 
provide a clear 
and unhindered 
airway for air to 
enter and exit 
the lungs. Inside 
the 
trachea, 
small 
hairs 
reside upon the 
inner 
walls. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 173 
 
These 
hairs 
catch dust and 
other 
contaminants 
from inhaled air, 
which are later 
expelled 
via 
coughing. 
Bronchi 
The bronchi are 
two 
tubes 
stemming off of 
the end of the 
trachea. 
Each 
tube is connected 
to a lung. 
The 
bronchi 
connect 
the 
wind pipe to the 
lungs, allowing 
air 
from 
external 
respiratory 
openings to pass 
efficiently into 
the lungs. Once 
in the lungs, the 
bronchi begin to 
branch out into 
secondary, 
smaller bronchi, 
coined 
tertiary 
bronchi. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 174 
 
Bronchioles 
Tertiary bronchi 
divide 
to 
even 
smaller, narrower 
tubes known as 
bronchioles. 
Bronchioles 
lead to alveolar 
sacs, which are 
sacs containing 
alveoli. 
Alveoli 
Alveoli 
are 
hollow, 
individual 
cavities that are 
found 
within 
alveolar sacs. 
Alveoli 
have 
extremely 
thin 
walls, 
which 
allows 
the 
exchange 
of 
oxygen 
and 
carbon dioxide 
to 
take 
place 
within 
the 
lungs. There are 
estimated to be 
three 
million 
alveoli in the 
average lung. 
Diaphragm 
The diaphragm is 
an 
important 
muscle 
of 
respiration which 
is 
situated 
beneath the lungs. 
The diaphragm 
contracts 
to 
expand 
the 
space inside the 
thoracic cavity, 
whilst moving a 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 175 
 
few 
inches 
inferiorly 
into 
the 
abdominal 
cavity. 
Whilst 
this 
is 
happening, the 
intercostal 
muscles 
also 
contract, which 
moves the rip 
cage up and out. 
The contractions 
force air into the 
lungs, 
by 
creating 
a 
negative 
pressure 
through 
expansion. 
 
Physiology of Gas Exchange 
Anatomy of respiratory system and organ functions cannot be 
complete if you don‘t understand the transition between CO2 and O2. 
Once air has been inhaled, it passed through the airways until it 
reaches the alveoli within the lungs.Alveolus are surrounded by 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 176 
 
capillaries, through which the gasses enter and exit. Carbon dioxide 
enters the alveolus, where oxygen is extracted and passed back into 
the body. The constant blood flow prevents saturation of the blood, 
allowing for optimal transfer.  The following picture better illustrates 
the process: 
 
Diseases and Illnesses of the Respiratory System 
With knowing the anatomy of respiratory system, you should also 
know that many conditions and illnesses can affect the respiratory 
system, some of the common problems include: - 
 Asthma – Asthma leads to a narrowing of the airways, which can 
cause breathlessness and wheezing. 
 Bronchitis – A condition that causes inflammation of the mucus 
lining within the one lung or both. 
 Emphysema – A disease that affects alveoli. 
 Influenza – An illness caused by a virus that can have a 
detrimental affect on one‘s respiratory system. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 177 
 
 Laryngitis – When one‘s vocal chords (larynx) become inflamed. 
 Pneumonia – When one or both lungs become inflamed. 
 Lung cancer – Although commonly associated with smokers, lung 
cancer can also affect those who do not smoke.  
 
 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 178 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 179 
 
Every tissue within the body requires oxygen to function. The respiratory 
system, which includes air passages, pulmonary vessels, the lungs, and 
breathing muscles, provides oxygenated blood to the body tissues and 
removes waste gases. 
The respiratory system, which includes air passages, pulmonary vessels, the 
lungs, and breathing muscles, aids the body in the exchange of gases 
between the air and blood, and between the blood and the body‘s billions of 
cells. Most of the organs of the respiratory system help to distribute air, but 
only the tiny, grape-like alveoli and the alveolar ducts are responsible for 
actual gas exchange. 
In addition to air distribution and gas exchange, the respiratory system 
filters, warms, and humidifies the air you breathe. Organs in the respiratory 
system also play a role in speech and the sense of smell. 
The respiratory system also helps the body maintain homeostasis, or balance 
among the many elements of the body‘s internal environment. 
The respiratory system is divided into two main components: 
Upper respiratory tract: Composed of the nose, the pharynx, and the 
larynx, the organs of the upper respiratory tract are located outside the chest 
cavity. 
 Nasal cavity: Inside the nose, the sticky mucous membrane lining the nasal 
cavity traps dust particles, and tiny hairs called cilia help move them to the 
nose to be sneezed or blown out. 
 Sinuses: These air-filled spaces alongside the nose help make the skull 
lighter. 
 Pharynx: Both food and air pass through the pharynx before reaching their 
appropriate destinations. The pharynx also plays a role in speech. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 180 
 
 Larynx: The larynx is essential to human speech. 
Lower respiratory tract: Composed of the trachea, the lungs, and all 
segments of the bronchial tree (including the alveoli), the organs of the 
lower respiratory tract are located inside the chest cavity. 
 Trachea: Located just below the larynx, the trachea is the main airway to 
the lungs. 
 Lungs: Together the lungs form one of the body‘s largest organs. They‘re 
responsible for providing oxygen to capillaries and exhaling carbon dioxide. 
 Bronchi: The bronchi branch from the trachea into each lung and create the 
network of intricate passages that supply the lungs with air. 
 Diaphragm: The diaphragm is the main respiratory muscle that contracts 
and relaxes to allow air into the lungs. 
 
The Respiratory System 
The respiratory system is made up of organs and tissues that help you 
breathe. The main parts of this system are the airways, the lungs and linked 
blood vessels, and the muscles that enable breathing. 
The Respiratory System 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 181 
 
 
Figure A shows the location of the respiratory structures in the body. Figure 
B is an enlarged view of the airways, alveoli (air sacs), and capillaries (tiny 
blood vessels). Figure C is a closeup view of gas exchange between the 
capillaries and alveoli. CO2 is carbon dioxide, and O2 is oxygen. 
Airways 
The airways are pipes that carry oxygen-rich air to your lungs. They also 
carry carbon dioxide, a waste gas, out of your lungs. The airways include 
your: 
 Nose and linked air passages (called nasal cavities) 
 Mouth 
 Larynx (LAR-ingks), or voice box 
 Trachea (TRA-ke-ah), or windpipe 
 Tubes called bronchial tubes or bronchi, and their branches 
Air first enters your body through your nose or mouth, which wets and 
warms the air. (Cold, dry air can irritate your lungs.) The air then travels 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 182 
 
through your voice box and down your windpipe. The windpipe splits into 
two bronchial tubes that enter your lungs. 
A thin flap of tissue called the epiglottis (ep-ih-GLOT-is) covers your 
windpipe when you swallow. This prevents food and drink from entering the 
air passages that lead to your lungs. 
Except for the mouth and some parts of the nose, all of the airways have 
special hairs called cilia (SIL-e-ah) that are coated with sticky mucus. The 
cilia trap germs and other foreign particles that enter your airways when you 
breathe in air. 
These fine hairs then sweep the particles up to the nose or mouth. From 
there, they're swallowed, coughed, or sneezed out of the body. Nose hairs 
and mouth saliva also trap particles and germs. 
Lungs and Blood Vessels 
Your lungs and linked blood vessels deliver oxygen to your body and 
remove carbon dioxide from your body. Your lungs lie on either side of your 
breastbone and fill the inside of your chest cavity. Your left lung is slightly 
smaller than your right lung to allow room for your heart. 
Within the lungs, your bronchi branch into thousands of smaller, thinner 
tubes called bronchioles. These tubes end in bunches of tiny round air sacs 
called alveoli (al-VEE-uhl-eye). 
Each of these air sacs is covered in a mesh of tiny blood vessels called 
capillaries. The capillaries connect to a network of arteries and veins that 
move blood through your body. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 183 
 
The pulmonary (PULL-mun-ary) artery and its branches deliver blood rich 
in carbon dioxide (and lacking in oxygen) to the capillaries that surround the 
air sacs. Inside the air sacs, carbon dioxide moves from the blood into the 
air. At the same time, oxygen moves from the air into the blood in the 
capillaries. 
The oxygen-rich blood then travels to the heart through the pulmonary vein 
and its branches. The heart pumps the oxygen-rich blood out to the body. 
The lungs are divided into five main sections called lobes. Some people need 
to have a diseased lung lobe removed. However, they can still breathe well 
using the rest of their lung lobes. 
Muscles Used for Breathing 
Muscles near the lungs help expand and contract (tighten) the lungs to allow 
breathing. These muscles include the: 
 Diaphragm (DI-ah-fram) 
 Intercostals muscles 
 Abdominal muscles 
 Muscles in the neck and collarbone area 
The diaphragm is a dome-shaped muscle located below your lungs. It 
separates the chest cavity from the abdominal cavity. The diaphragm is the 
main muscle used for breathing. 
The intercostals muscles are located between your ribs. They also play a 
major role in helping you breathe. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 184 
 
Beneath your diaphragm are abdominal muscles. They help you breathe out 
when you're breathing fast (for example, during physical activity). 
Muscles in your neck and collarbone area help you breathe in when other 
muscles involved in breathing don't work well, or when lung disease impairs 
your breathing. 
Breathing In (Inhalation) 
When you breathe in, or inhale, your diaphragm contracts (tightens) and 
moves downward. This increases the space in your chest cavity, into which 
your lungs expand. The intercostals muscles between your ribs also help 
enlarge the chest cavity. They contract to pull your rib cage both upward and 
outward when you inhale. 
As your lungs expand, air is sucked in through your nose or mouth. The air 
travels down your windpipe and into your lungs. After passing through your 
bronchial tubes, the air finally reaches and enters the alveoli (air sacs). 
Through the very thin walls of the alveoli, oxygen from the air passes to the 
surrounding capillaries (blood vessels). A red blood cell protein called 
hemoglobin helps move oxygen from the air sacs to the blood. 
At the same time, carbon dioxide moves from the capillaries into the air 
sacs. The gas has traveled in the bloodstream from the right side of the heart 
through the pulmonary artery. 
Oxygen-rich blood from the lungs is carried through a network of capillaries 
to the pulmonary vein. This vein delivers the oxygen-rich blood to the left 
side of the heart. The left side of the heart pumps the blood to the rest of the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 185 
 
body. There, the oxygen in the blood moves from blood vessels into 
surrounding tissues. 
Breathing Out (Exhalation) 
When you breathe out, or exhale, your diaphragm relaxes and moves upward 
into the chest cavity. The intercostal muscles between the ribs also relax to 
reduce the space in the chest cavity. 
As the space in the chest cavity gets smaller, air rich in carbon dioxide is 
forced out of your lungs and windpipe, and then out of your nose or mouth. 
Breathing out requires no effort from your body unless you have a lung 
disease or are doing physical activity. When you're physically active, your 
abdominal muscles contract and push your diaphragm against your lungs 
even more than usual. This rapidly pushes air out of your lungs. 
 
The act of breathing 
 
The act of breathing has two stages – inhalation and exhalation 
 Inhalation – the intake of air into the lungs through expansion of chest 
volume. 
 Exhalation – the expulsion of air from the lungs through contraction of 
chest volume. 
 
Inhalation and exhalation involves muscles: 
1. Rib muscles = the muscles between the ribs in the chest. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 186 
 
2. Diaphragm muscle 
 
Muscle movement – the diaphragm and rib muscles are constantly 
contracting and relaxing (approximately 16 times per minute), thus causing 
the 
chest 
cavity 
to 
increase 
and 
decrease. 
 
During inhalation – the muscles contract: 
Contraction of the diaphragm muscle – causes the diaphragm to flatten, thus 
enlarging 
the 
chest 
cavity. 
Contraction of the rib muscles – causes the ribs to rise, thus increasing the 
chest 
volume. 
 
The chest cavity expands, thus reducing air pressure and causing air to be 
passively drawn into the lungs. Air passes from the high pressure outside the 
lungs 
to 
the 
low 
pressure 
inside 
the 
lungs. 
 
During exhalation – the muscles relax: 
The muscles are no longer contracting, they are relaxed. 
The diaphragm curves and rises, the ribs descend – and chest volume 
decreases. 
 
The chest cavity contracts thus increasing air pressure and causing the air in 
the lungs to be expelled through the upper respiratory tract. Exhalation, too, 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 187 
 
is passive. Air passes from the high pressure in the lungs to the low pressure 
in the upper respiratory tract. 
Inhalation and exhalation are involuntary and therefore their control 
requires an effort. 
The act of breathing – Illustration & Animation 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 188 
 
The respiratory system- Illustration 
 
Lungs and their structure and exchange of gases in the lungs: 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 189 
 
Gas exchange is the delivery of oxygen from the lungs to the bloodstream, 
and the elimination of carbon dioxide from the bloodstream to the lungs. It 
occurs in the lungs between the alveoli and a network of tiny blood vessels 
called capillaries, which are located in the walls of the alveoli. 
Respiratory gases—oxygen and carbon dioxide—move between theair and 
the blood across the respiratory exchange surfaces in the lungs. The structure 
of the human lung provides an immense internal surface that facilitates gas 
exchange between the alveoli and the blood in the pulmonary capillaries. 
 
The primary function of the respiratory system is to exchange oxygen and 
carbon dioxide. Inhaled oxygen enters the lungs and reaches the alveoli. The 
layers of cells lining the alveoli and the surrounding capillaries are each only 
one cell thick and are in very close contact with each other. This barrier 
between air and blood averages about 1 micron ( 1 / 10,000 of a centimeter, or 
0.000039 inch) in thickness. Oxygen passes quickly through this air-blood 
barrier into the blood in the capillaries. Similarly, carbon dioxide passes 
from the blood into the alveoli and is then exhaled. 
Oxygenated blood travels from the lungs through the pulmonary veins and 
into the left side of the heart, which pumps the blood to the rest of the body 
(see Function of the Heart). Oxygen-deficient, carbon dioxide-rich blood 
returns to the right side of the heart through two large veins, the superior 
vena cava and the inferior vena cava. Then the blood is pumped through the 
pulmonary artery to the lungs, where it picks up oxygen and releases carbon 
dioxide. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 190 
 
 
Gas Exchange between Alveoli and Capillaries 
To support the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide, about 5 to 8 liters 
(about 1.3 to 2.1 gallons) of air per minute are brought in and out of the 
lungs, and about three tenths of a liter of oxygen is transferred from the 
alveoli to the blood each minute, even when the person is at rest. At the 
same time, a similar volume of carbon dioxide moves from the blood to the 
alveoli and is exhaled. During exercise, it is possible to breathe in and out 
more than 100 liters (about 26 gallons) of air per minute and extract 3 liters 
(a little less than 1 gallon) of oxygen from this air per minute. The rate at 
which oxygen is used by the body is one measure of the rate of energy 
expended by the body. Breathing in and out is accomplished by respiratory 
muscles. 
Gas Exchange between Alveolar Spaces and Capillaries 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 191 
 
The function of the respiratory system is to exchange two gases: oxygen and carbon dioxid
The exchange takes place in the millions of alveoli in the lungs and the capillaries th
envelop them. As shown below, inhaled oxygen moves from the alveoli to the blood in t
capillaries, and carbon dioxide moves from the blood in the capillaries to the air in t
alveoli. 
 
Three processes are essential for the transfer of oxygen from the outside air 
to the blood flowing through the lungs: ventilation, diffusion, and perfusion. 
 Ventilation is the process by which air moves in and out of the lungs. 
 Diffusion is the spontaneous movement of gases, without the use of 
any energy or effort by the body, between the gas in the alveoli and 
the blood in the capillaries in the lungs. 
 Perfusion is the process by which the cardiovascular system pumps 
blood throughout the lungs. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 192 
 
The body's circulation is an essential link between the atmosphere, which 
contains oxygen, and the cells of the body, which consume oxygen. For 
example, the delivery of oxygen to the muscle cells throughout the body 
depends not only on the lungs but also on the ability of the blood to carry 
oxygen and on the ability of the circulation to transport blood to muscle. 
The respiratory system starts at the nose and mouth and continues through 
the airways and the lungs. Air enters the respiratory system through the nose 
and mouth and passes down the throat (pharynx) and through the voice box, 
or larynx. The entrance to the larynx is covered by a small flap of tissue 
(epiglottis) that automatically closes during swallowing, thus preventing 
food or drink from entering the airways. 
The largest airway is the windpipe (trachea), which branches into two 
smaller airways: the left and right bronchi, which lead to the two lungs. Each 
lung is divided into sections (lobes): three in the right lung and two in the 
left lung. The left lung is a little smaller than the right lung because it shares 
space in the left side of the chest with the heart. 
 
Inside the Lungs and Airways 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 193 
 
 
The bronchi themselves branch many times into smaller airways, ending in 
the narrowest airways (bronchioles), which are as small as one half of a 
millimeter across. The airways resemble an upside-down tree, which is why 
this part of the respiratory system is often called the bronchial tree. Large 
airways are held open by semiflexible, fibrous connective tissue called 
cartilage. Smaller airways are supported by the lung tissue that surrounds 
and is attached to them. The walls of the smaller airways have a thin, 
circular layer of smooth muscle. The airway muscle can dilate or constrict, 
thus changing airway size. 
At the end of each bronchiole are thousands of small air sacs (alveoli). 
Together, the millions of alveoli of the lungs form a surface of more than 
100 square meters. Within the alveolar walls is a dense network of tiny 
blood vessels called capillaries. The extremely thin barrier between air and 
capillaries allows oxygen to move from the alveoli into the blood and allows 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 194 
 
carbon dioxide to move from the blood in the capillaries into the air in the 
alveoli. 
The pleura are a slippery membrane that covers the lungs as well as the 
inside of the chest wall. It allows the lungs to move smoothly during 
breathing and as the person moves. Normally, the two layers of the pleura 
have only a small amount of lubricating fluid between them. The two layers 
glide smoothly over each other as the lungs change size and shape. 
 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 195 
 
 
The respiratory airways include the respiratory apertures (mouth and 
nose), the trachea and a branching system of long, flexible tubes 
(bronchi) that branch of to shorter and narrower tubes (broncheoli) 
until they end in sacs called the pulmonary alveoli. 
The lungs encompass the entire system of tubes branching out from the 
main bronchi to the alveoli. 
Measuring the functioning of the lungs is a medical tool for diagnosing 
problems in the respiratory system. 
Air volume (in liters) – lung capacity 
 Maximum lung volume is known as TLC (total lung capacity). It can be 
obtained by maximum strenuous inhalation. 
The maximum lung volume of a healthy adult is up to 5-6 liters. In 
children the maximum lung volume is up to 2-3 liters, depending on 
age. In infants it is up to 600-1000 milliliters. 
Note! Differences in lung volume can only be caused by gender, age, 
and height. 
 Essential air volume is the maximum volume utilized by the lungs for 
inhalation, also known as VC (vital capacity). 
 Residual volume (RV) is the volume of air remaining in the lungs after 
strenuous exhalation when the lungs feel completely empty. Residual 
volume prevents the broncheoli and the alveoli from sticking together. 
Residual volume is approximately 1.5 liters (adults). 
 The differential between total lung capacity and residual volume is 
the maximal volume utilized by the lungs in order to breath. It is 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 196 
 
known as vital capacity(VC). In an adult, the VC is between 3.5 and 4.5 
liters. 
 Tidal Volume or VT is the volume of air displaced between normal 
inspiration and expiration. In a healthy adult the tidal volume is 
approximately 500 milliliters. 
Rate of airflow through the respiratory airways (into and out of the 
lungs).This measures the effectiveness of airflow. 
 
Efficiency of diffusion of oxygen from the pulmonary alveoli into the 
blood (not dealt with in this unit). 
 
 
TLC (total lung capacity) of children 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 197 
 
 
 
 
Examining lung function 
 
The most common, accessible and efficient method of measuring lung 
function is by means of a spirometer. Its purpose is to diagnose obstructive 
diseases of the respiratory system. It produces a diagram (graphic depiction) 
of the volume of air expired in a given time (liter/minute) 
 
The spirometer shows the rate at which air is expelled from the lungs. It 
measures the total lung capacity up to the residual volume (this test does not 
show 
the 
rate 
at 
which 
oxygen 
is 
absorbed). 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 198 
 
 
If the airways are blocked the rate of the airflow of the lungs decreases. This 
will show on the diagram and thus indicate that there is a problem in the 
airways. 
The most common obstruction stems from excessive phlegm, or from 
swelling of the inner wall of the air ways. 
 
 
The most common problem of blockage of the air ways is asthma. people 
suffering from asthma it take longer to empty the lungs than healthy people. 
For example, during the first second of exhalation, only half of the vital air 
capacity in their lungs is expelled as opposed to 90% in healthy people. The 
rest is exhaled much later. 
A spirometer examination takes only a few seconds. It is completely safe but 
there is a need for the patient to cooperate in order to obtain accurate results. 
Stages of the examination: 
1. The patient is asked to inhale as deeply as possible. 
2. The patient is asked to exhale strenuously into the spirometer. 
3. The patient is asked to continue to expel air for a few seconds, despite 
the strong urge to breathe in. 
4. The test is repeated twice or three times. 
 
 
Respiratory rate 
 
Children in the upper classes of elementary school breathe about 20 times 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 199 
 
per 
minute. 
 
Every breath causes an inhalation of approximately 7 milliliters of air 
volume per kilogram of body weight. 
A child who weighs 30 kilos inhales approximately 210 milliliters of air 
volume (210X30). In other words, in the duration of a minute some 4200 
milliliters of air volume enters and be expelled from the lungs. 
Athletes breathe slightly deeper and slower. With every breath they inhale 
approximately 10 milliliters of air per kilogram. Thus an athletic child who 
weighs 30 kilos will only breathe 15 times in the duration space of a minute. 
Each inhalation will require some 300 milliliters of air volume. In the space 
of a minute 4500 milliliters of air volume will enter and be expelled from the 
his lungs. We can deduce from this that athletes ventilate their airways in a 
much 
more 
efficient 
way. 
 
When we are under strain we breathe faster and more deeply. Since the 
lungs contain a reserve of air, we do not become tired because lack of air 
(oxygen) is causing respiratory restriction, but because of strain and 
tiredness 
in 
our 
respiratory 
and 
heart 
muscles. 
 
When we are under emotional stress (before an exam, in distress, or feeling 
very frightened) we breathe faster, but our breathing is shallower. For 
example, under stress we inhale 30 times per minute but at a rate of only 4 
milliliters per kilo. In other words, overall only 3600 milliliters per minute 
are passing through our airways, so we feel ―short of breath.‖ 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 200 
 
During severe asthma attacks, the breathing of asthma patients is shallower 
and at a higher rate. Their breathing is thus not very efficient. 
nasal cavity: Contains nasal septum, turbinates, 
and cilia. 
nasal septum:Divides nasal cavities into right and 
left sides. 
Turbinates: Bones that protrude into the nasal 
cavity- they increase surface area for filtering dust 
and dirt particles by the mucous membrane. 
Cilia: Nose hairs, trap larger dirt particles. 
Sinuses: Cavities in the skull, ducts connect them 
to the nasal cavity, lined with mucous membrane 
to warm and moisten the air. Give resonance to 
voice. 
types of sinuses: Frontal, maxillary, ethmoid, and 
sphenoid. 
Pharynx: Throat. Common passageway for air 
and food. 5" long. 
Epiglottis:When food is swallowed, this closes 
over the opening to the larnyx, preventing food 
from entering the lungs. 
Larynx:Voice box. Triangular chamber below 
pharynx. "Adam's Apple". 
Glottis: Vocal cords within the larynx. 
Trachea: Windpipe. 4.5" long. Walls are alternate 
bands of membrane and c-shaped rings of hyaline 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 201 
 
cartilage to keep it open. Lined with ciliated 
mucous membrane. Coughing and expectoration 
gets rid of dust-laden mucous. 
Bronchi:Similar to trachea with ciliated mucous 
membrane and hyaline cartilage. Lower end of 
trachea divides into right and left this. 
bronchial tubes: Cartilaginous plates (instead of 
c-shaped rings of trachea). 
Bronchioles: Thinner walls of smooth muscle, 
lined with ciliated epithelium. Subdivision of 
bronci. At the end, alveolar duct and cluster of 
alveoli. 
Alveoli: Composed of single layer of epithelial 
tissue. Inner surfaces covered with surfactant to 
keep from collapsing. Each surrounded by 
capillaries. Oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange 
takes place between these and capillaries. 
Lungs: Fill thoracic cavity. Tissue is porous and 
spongy- it floats. 
Apex:Upper part of lung. 
Base: Lower part of lung. 
right lung: Larger and shorter (displaced by liver) 
and has three lobes. 
left lung:Smaller (displaced by heart) and has two 
lobes. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 202 
 
Pleura: Thin, moist, slippery membrane that 
covers lungs. Double-walled sac. Space is pleural 
cavity- filled with pleural fluid to prevent friciton. 
functions of the respiratory system:Respiration 
(external, internal, and cellular). Production of 
sound (vocal cords). Pulmonary venilation. 
Inspiration (intercostal muscles lift ribs outward, 
sternum rises and the diaphragm contracts and 
moves downward- this increases the volume of the 
lungs and the air rushes in). 
pulmonary ventilation:Breathing. 
respiratory movement: 1 inspiration and 1 
expiration= 1 respiration. Normal adult= 14-20 
respirations per minute. Increases with exercise, 
body temperature, and certain diseases. Age 
(newborn= 40-60 per minute). Sleep= respirations 
go down. Emotion can bring respirations up or 
down. 
Coughing:Deep breath followed by forceful 
expulsion of air to clean lower respiratory tract. 
Hiccups: Spasm of diaphragm and spasmodic 
closure of the glottis- irritation to diaphragm or 
phrenic nerve. 
Sneezing: Air forced through nose to clear 
respiratory tract. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 203 
 
Yawning: Deep prolonged breath that fills the 
lungs, increases oxygen within the blood. 
neural factors of breathing control: Respiratory 
center located in medulla oblongata (in the brain). 
Increase in CO2 and decrease in O2 in the blood 
will trigger respiratory center. 
phrenic nerve: Stimulates the diaphragm. 
chemical factors of breathing control: Depends 
on 
the 
levels 
of 
CO2 
in 
the 
blood. 
Chemoreceptors in aorta and carotid arteries 
sensitive to the amount of blood oxygen. 
 
Diseases of the respiratory system 
Diseases and conditions of the respiratory system fall into two 
categories:  Viruses such as influenza, bacterial pneumonia and the 
newenterovirus respiratory virus that has been diagnosed in children; and 
chronic diseases, such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). According to Dr. Neal Chaisson, who practices pulmonary 
medicine at the Cleveland Clinic, there is not much that can be done for viral 
infections but to let them run their course. "Antibiotics are not effective in 
treating viruses and the best thing to do is just rest," he said.  
COPD is the intersection of three related conditions — chronic bronchitis, 
chronic asthma and emphysema, Chaisson told Live Science. It is a 
progressive disease that makes it increasingly difficult for sufferers to 
breath. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 204 
 
Asthma is a chronic inflammation of the lung airways that causes coughing, 
wheezing, chest tightness or shortness of breath, according to Tonya 
Winders, president of the Allergy & Asthma Network. These signs and 
symptoms may be worse when a person is exposed to their triggers, which 
can include air pollution, tobacco smoke, factory fumes, cleaning solvents, 
infections, pollens, foods, cold air, exercise, chemicals and medications.  
Lung cancer is often associated with smoking, but the disease can affect 
non-smokers as well. Every year, about 16,000 to 24,000 Americans die of 
lung cancer, even though they have never smoked, according to the 
American. Like all cancers, lung cancer is caused by the uncontrolled 
growth of abnormal cells. 
Mechanism of respiration (internal and external respiration) 
Breathing: everyone does it, but how does it work? Most people tend to 
equate breathing with respiration, assuming they are one and the same, but 
really the process of respiration is a much longer, more complicated 
system, of which breathing is just one of its many steps. There are also 
two different types of respiration: cellular and physiological, the latter of 
which concerns the process of breathing and the respiratory system. 
In this guide, we‘ll cover physiological respiration, and touch a bit on 
cellular respiration and its two types: aerobic and anaerobic. For some 
more helpful background information, consider this introduction to 
biology course. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 205 
 
What is Respiration? 
There are two types of respiration: cellular and physiological. Before we 
get into either, you might want to consider this course on medical 
terminology or this course on the principles of medical language, both 
of which should make understanding the processes described here much 
easier. 
 Cellular Respiration 
The process of converting molecules into energy through oxidization. This 
is the opposite of photosynthesis, the biochemical process used by plants 
and some types of bacteria to convert light energy into chemical 
energy. Learn more about photosynthesis in this guide. 
In terms of cellular respiration, there are two types: aerobic and anaerobic. 
In short, the process of aerobic respiration requires oxygen, while the 
process of anaerobic respiration does not require oxygen. Learn a bit 
more about both aerobic and anaerobic respiration in this guide. 
 Physiological Respiration 
The process involving absorption of oxygen in the air into the cells of an 
organism, with the output of carbon dioxide back into the environment. It 
is a cycle between the organisms that breath oxygen and the organisms 
that breath carbon dioxide. 
There are two types of physiological respiration in animals: internal 
respiration, and external respiration. Internal respiration is the process of 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 206 
 
cells in the body exchanging gases, while external respiration is the 
process of respiration that actually takes place within respiratory organs 
like the lungs. This is the actual exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide 
between an organism and its environment, which involves the process of 
breathing directly. 
It‘s important to work out and learn proper breathing techniques to 
maintain a strong cardiovascular and respiratory system.  
Process of Respiration: Physiological 
For humans and other oxygen-breathing vertebrates, the process of 
respiration takes place within the lungs, driven by a series of mechanics 
called inhalation and exhalation. These are the biological mechanisms that 
make up breathing. We breathe in to take in oxygen, and breathe out to 
expel carbon dioxide! There‘s more involved with the process of 
respiration than just the lungs, though. The entire process uses the nasal 
cavity, the mouth, the larynx, the trachea, and the bronchial tubes of the 
lungs as well. 
 External Respiration 
To breathe in and breathe out, we use our intercostals muscles, the muscle 
group that lies between our ribs. When we breathe in through the nose or 
mouth, these intercostals muscles contract, our sternum moves up and out 
along with our ribs, and our diaphragm flattens. The diaphragm is a sheet 
of muscle that lies across the bottom of the rib cage, and it is vital for 
proper respiration. When the diaphragm contracts, this allows the volume 
in our thoracic cavity to expand, thus reducing pressure and enabling us to 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 207 
 
draw air into our lungs. With the help of our diaphragm and thoracic 
cavity, our body creates a literal suction. 
Similarly, when we exhale, our intercostals muscles and our diaphragm 
relax. This causes the volume of the thoracic cavity to decrease and the 
pressure inside to increase, which expels the air in what is called an 
exhalation. 
 Internal Respiration 
What is actually happening inside the body between the inhale and the 
exhale? That‘s where internal respiration comes in. Internal respiration 
occurs after and during the process of external respiration, and it‘s when 
the gases in the air we‘ve drawn into our lungs can be sorted out, the 
oxygen absorbed in our blood and the carbon dioxide removed. 
This happens because our heart is pumping oxygen-low blood through the 
pulmonary arteries and into the lungs. At the ends of the pulmonary 
arteries are small blood vessels called capillaries, which wrap like a net 
around the alveoli. The alveoli is where our bronchial tubes transport the 
air we inhale. They are the round, clustered, and sac-like tips of the 
respiratory tree where gas exchange occurs. 
Inside the alveoli, the oxygen rich air we‘ve inhaled is pumped into the red 
blood cells located in the surrounding capillaries, enriching the blood with 
much needed oxygen. In exchange, the red blood cells expel the carbon 
dioxide they‘re carrying into the alveoli. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 208 
 
Carbon dioxide is a waste product created through the process of 
metabolism, and too much of it in our blood can cause harm to our body. It 
can raise the levels of acidity in your blood, which is damaging to your 
heart, and even cause suffocation! When you hold your breath by inhaling 
and then not immediately exhaling, the reason you begin to feel light-
headed is not actually due to the sudden lack of oxygen intake, but the 
excess of carbon dioxide built up in your body. Of course, both are just as 
important, so make sure to practice proper breathing techniques! 
Once the air in your alveoli are enriched with carbon dioxide from the 
newly oxygen riched red blood cells, this air travels back up the bronchial 
tubes and out the nose or mouth, in a process called exhalation. At the 
same time, the pulmonary veins transport the oxygen rich blood back to 
the heart to be distributed throughout the body.  
There is a big difference between external and internal respiration. External 
respiration is basically the transfer of gas between respiratory organs such as 
lungs and the outer environment. It takes place prior to internal respiration. 
Internal respiration is the transfer of gas between the blood and cells. 
External respiration also known as breathing refers to a process of inhaling 
oxygen from the air into the lungs and expelling carbon dioxide from the 
lungs to the air. Exchange of gases both in and out of the blood occurs 
simultaneously. External respiration is a physical process during which 
oxygen is taken up by capillaries of lung alveoli and carbon dioxide is 
released from blood. 
Internal respiration or tissue respiration/cellular respiration refers to a 
metabolic process in which oxygen is released to tissues or living cells and 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 209 
 
carbon dioxide is absorbed by the blood. Once inside the cell the oxygen is 
used for producing energy in the form of ATP or adenosine triphosphate. 
 
Lung 
capacity: 
The 
inspiratory 
capacity plus 
the 
functional 
residual capacity; the volume of air contained in the lungs at the end of a 
maximal inspiration; also equals vital capacity plus residual volume. 
The average total lung capacity of an adult human male is about six liters of 
air, but only a small amount of this capacity is used during normal breathing. 
Tidal breathing is normal, resting breathing; the tidal volume is the volume 
of air that is inhaled or exhaled in a single such breath. 
The lung capacities are measurements of two or more volumes. The 
vital capacity (VC) measures the maximum amount of air that can be inhaled 
or exhaled during a respiratory cycle. It is the sum of the expiratory 
reserve volume, tidal volume, and inspiratory reserve volume. 
Lung volumes and lung capacities refer to the volume of air associated 
with different phases of the respiratory cycle. Lung volumes are directly 
measured; Lung capacities are inferred from lung volumes. The average total 
lung capacity of an adult human male is about 6 liters of air, but only a small 
amount of this capacity is used during normal breathing. 
Tidal breathing is normal, resting breathing; the tidal volume is the volume 
of air that is inhaled or exhaled in only a single such breath. 
The average human respiratory rate is 30-60 breaths per minute at 
birth, decreasing to 12-20 breaths per minute in adults. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 210 
 
A person who is born and lives at sea level will develop a slightly smaller 
lung capacity than a person who spends their life at a high altitude. This is 
because the partial pressure of oxygen is lower at higher altitude which, as a 
result means that oxygen less readily diffuses into the bloodstream. In 
response to higher altitude, the body's diffusing capacity increases in order 
to process more air. 
When someone living at or near sea level travels to locations at high 
altitudes (e.g., the Andes; Denver, Colorado; Tibet; the Himalayas) that 
person can develop a condition called altitude sickness because their lungs 
remove adequate amounts of carbon dioxide but they do not take in enough 
oxygen. (In normal individuals, carbon dioxide is the primary determinant of 
respiratory drive.) 
Specific changes in lung volumes also occur during pregnancy. Functional 
residual capacity drops 18–20%, typically falling from 1.7 to 1.35 liters, due 
to the compression of the diaphragm by the uterus. The compression also 
causes 
a 
decreased total 
lung 
capacity (TLC) 
by 
5% and 
decreased expiratory reserve volume by 20%.Tidal volume increases by 30–
40%, from 0.5 to 0.7 liters, and minute ventilation by 30–40% giving an 
increase in pulmonary ventilation. This is necessary to meet the increased 
oxygen requirement of the body, which reaches 50 mL/min, 20 mL of which 
goes to reproductive tissues. Overall, the net change in maximum breathing 
capacity is zero.  
Lung Volumes and Capacities 
Different animals exhibit different lung capacities based on their activities. 
For example, cheetahs have evolved a much higher lung capacity than 
humans in order to provide oxygen to all the muscles in the body, allowing 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 211 
 
them to run very fast. Elephants also have a high lung capacity due to their 
large body and their need to take up oxygen in accordance with their body 
size. 
Human lung size is determined by genetics, gender, and height. At maximal 
capacity, an average lung can hold almost six liters of air; however, lungs do 
not usually operate at maximal capacity. Air in the lungs is measured in 
terms of lung volumes and lung capacities . Volume measures the amount of 
air for one function (such as inhalation or exhalation) and capacity is any 
two or more volumes (for example, how much can be inhaled from the end 
of a maximal exhalation). 
 
 
Human lung volumes and capacities 
The total lung capacity of the adult male is six liters. Tidal volume is the 
volume of air inhaled in a single, normal breath. Inspiratory capacity is the 
amount of air taken in during a deep breath, while residual volume is the 
amount of air left in the lungs after forceful respiration. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 212 
 
 
Lung Volumes 
The volume in the lung can be divided into four units: tidal volume, 
expiratory reserve volume, inspiratory reserve volume, and residual volume. 
Tidal volume (TV) measures the amount of air that is inspired and expired 
during a normal breath. On average, this volume is around one-half liter, 
which is a little less than the capacity of a 20-ounce drink bottle. The 
expiratory reserve volume (ERV) is the additional amount of air that can be 
exhaled after a normal exhalation. It is the reserve amount that can be 
exhaled beyond what is normal. Conversely, the inspiratory reserve volume 
(IRV) is the additional amount of air that can be inhaled after a normal 
inhalation. The residual volume (RV) is the amount of air that is left after 
expiratory reserve volume is exhaled. The lungs are never completely 
empty; there is always some air left in the lungs after a maximal exhalation. 
If this residual volume did not exist and the lungs emptied completely, the 
lung tissues would stick together. The energy necessary to re-inflate the lung 
could be too great to overcome. Therefore, there is always some air 
remaining in the lungs. Residual volume is also important for preventing 
large fluctuations in respiratory gases (O2 and CO2). The residual volume is 
the only lung volume that cannot be measured directly because it is 
impossible to completely empty the lung of air. This volume can only be 
calculated rather than measured. . 
Lung volumes are measured by a technique called spirometry. An important 
measurement taken during spirometry is the forced expiratory volume 
(FEV), which measures how much air can be forced out of the lung over a 
specific period, usually one second (FEV1). In addition, the forced vital 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 213 
 
capacity (FVC), which is the total amount of air that can be forcibly exhaled, 
is measured. The ratio of these values (FEV1/FVC ratio) is used to diagnose 
lung diseases including asthma, emphysema, and fibrosis. If the FEV1/FVC 
ratio is high, the lungs are not compliant (meaning they are stiff and unable 
to bend properly); the patient probably has lung fibrosis. Patients exhale 
most of the lung volume very quickly. Conversely, when the FEV1/FVC 
ratio is low, there is resistance in the lung that is characteristic of asthma. In 
this instance, it is difficult for the patient to get the air out of his or her lungs. 
It takes a long time to reach the maximal exhalation volume. In either case, 
breathing is difficult and complications arise. 
Lung Capacities 
The lung capacities are measurements of two or more volumes. The vital 
capacity (VC) measures the maximum amount of air that can be inhaled or 
exhaled during a respiratory cycle. It is the sum of the expiratory reserve 
volume, tidal volume, and inspiratory reserve volume. The inspiratory 
capacity (IC) is the amount of air that can be inhaled after the end of a 
normal expiration. It is, therefore, the sum of the tidal volume and 
inspiratory reserve volume. The functional residual capacity (FRC) includes 
the expiratory reserve volume and the residual volume. The FRC measures 
the amount of additional air that can be exhaled after a normal exhalation. 
The total lung capacity (TLC) is a measurement of the total amount of air 
that the lung can hold. It is the sum of the residual volume, expiratory 
reserve volume, tidal volume, and inspiratory reserve volume. 
 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 214 
 
The following terms describe the various lung (respiratory) volumes: 
 The tidal volume (TV),about 500 mL, is the amount of air inspired 
during normal, relaxed breathing. 
 The inspiratory reserve volume (IRV), about 3,100 mL, is the 
additional air that can be forcibly inhaled after the inspiration of a 
normal tidal volume. 
 The expiratory reserve volume (ERV), about 1,200 mL, is the 
additional air that can be forcibly exhaled after the expiration of a 
normal tidal volume. 
 Residual volume (RV), about 1,200 mL, is the volume of air still 
remaining in the lungs after the expiratory reserve volume is exhaled. 
Summing specific lung volumes produces the following lung capacities: 
 The total lung capacity (TLC), about 6,000 mL, is the maximum 
amount of air that can fill the lungs (TLC = TV + IRV + ERV + RV). 
 The vital capacity (VC), about 4,800 mL, is the total amount of air 
that can be expired after fully inhaling (VC = TV + IRV + ERV = 
approximately 80 percent TLC). The value varies according to age 
and body size. 
 The inspiratory capacity (IC), about 3,600 mL, is the maximum 
amount of air that can be inspired (IC = TV + IRV). 
 The functional residual capacity (FRC), about 2,400 mL, is the 
amount of air remaining in the lungs after a normal expiration (FRC = 
RV + ERV). 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 215 
 
Some of the air in the lungs does not participate in gas exchange. Such air is 
located in the anatomical dead space within bronchi and bronchioles—that 
is, outside the alveoli. 
 
 
 
 
Tidal 
volume: 
Tidal 
volume is 
the 
lung volume representing 
the 
normal volume of air displaced between normal inhalation and exhalation 
when extra effort is not applied. In a healthy, young human adult, tidal 
volume is approximately 500 mL per inspiration or 7 mL/kg of body mass. 
Tidal volume plays a significant role during mechanical ventilation to ensure 
adequate ventilation without causing trauma to the lungs. Tidal volume is 
measured in milliliters and ventilation volumes are estimated based on a 
patient's ideal body mass. Measurement of tidal volume can be affected 
(usually overestimated) by leaks in the breathing circuit or the introduction 
of additional gas, for example during the introduction of nebulizer drugs. 
Ventilator-induced lung injury such as ALI/ARDS can be caused by 
ventilation with very large tidal volumes in normal lungs, as well as 
ventilation with moderate or small volumes in previously injured lungs, and 
research shows that the incidence of ALI increases with higher tidal volume 
settings in non neurologically-impaired patients.   
 
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 216 
 
The digestive system is a group of organs working together to convert food 
into energy and basic nutrients to feed the entire body. Food passes through 
a long tube inside the body known as the alimentary canal or the 
gastrointestinal tract (GI tract). 
The mouth is the beginning of the digestive tract. In fact, digestionstarts 
here as soon as you take the first bite of a meal. Chewing breaks the food 
into pieces that are more easily digested, while saliva mixes with food to 
begin the process of breaking it down into a form your body can absorb and 
use. The hollow organs that make up the GI tract are the mouth, 
esophagus,stomach, small intestine, large intestine—which includes 
the rectum—and anus. Food enters the mouth and passes to the anus 
through the hollow organs of the GI tract. The liver, pancreas, 
and gallbladder are the solid organs of the digestive. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 217 
 
 
Digestion is important for breaking down food into nutrients, which the 
body uses for energy, growth, and cell repair. Food and drink must be 
changed into smaller molecules of nutrients before the blood absorbs them 
and carries them to cells throughout the body. The digestive tract, also 
known as the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, starts at the mouth, continues to the 
esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine (commonly referred to as 
the colon) and rectum, and ends at the anus. The entire system — from 
mouth to anus — is about 30 feet (9 meters) long. 
The human digestive system consists of the gastrointestinal tract plus 
the accessory organs of digestion (the tongue, salivary, pancreas, liver, 
and gallbladder). In this system, the process of digestion has many stages, 
the first of which starts in the mouth (oral cavity). Digestion involves the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 218 
 
breakdown of food into smaller and smaller components which can be 
absorbed and assimilated into the body. The secretion of saliva helps to 
produce a bolus which can be swallowed to pass down the esophagus and 
into the stomach. 
Saliva also contains a catalytic enzyme called amylase which starts to act on 
food in the mouth. Another digestive enzyme called lingual is secreted by 
some of the lingual papillae on the tongue and also from serous glands in the 
main salivary glands. Digestion is helped by the mastication of food by 
the teeth and also by the  muscular actions of peristalsis and segmentation 
contractions. Gastric juice in the stomach is essential for the continuation of 
digestion as is the production of mucus in the stomach. 
Peristalsis is the rhythmic contraction of muscles that begins in the 
esophagus and continues along the wall of the stomach and the rest of 
the gastrointestinal tract. This initially results in the production 
of chyme which when fully broken down in the small intestine is absorbed 
as chyle into the lymphatic system. Most of the digestion of food takes place 
in the small intestine. Water and some minerals are reabsorbed back into the 
blood, in the colon of the large intestine. The waste products of digestion are 
defecated from the anus via the rectum. 
There are several organs and other components involved in the digestion of 
food. The organs known as the accessory digestive glands are the liver, gall 
bladder and pancreas. 
Other 
components 
include 
the mouth, teeth and epiglottis. 
The largest structure of the digestive system is the gastrointestinal tract (GI 
tract). This starts at the mouth and ends at the anus, covering a distance of 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 219 
 
about nine (9) metres.  The largest part of the GI tract is the colon or large 
intestine. Water is absorbed here and remaining waste matter is stored prior 
to defecation.  Most of the digestion of food takes place in the small 
intestine. A major digestive organ is the stomach. Within its mucosa are 
millions of embedded gastric glands. Their secretions are vital to the 
functioning of the organ. There are many specialized cells of the GI tract. 
These include the various cells of the gastric glands, taste cells, pancreatic 
duct cells,enterocytes and microfold cells. 
 
Mouth 
The mouth is the first part of the gastrointestinal tract and is equipped with 
several structures that begin the first processes of digestion. These include 
salivary glands, teeth and the tongue. The mouth consists of two regions, the 
vestibule and the oral cavity proper. The vestibule is the area between the 
teeth, lips and cheeks, and the rest is the oral cavity proper. Most of the oral 
cavity is lined with oral mucosa, a mucous membrane that produces a 
lubricating mucus, of which only a small amount is needed. Mucous 
membranes vary in structure in the different regions of the body but they all 
produce a lubricating mucus, which is either secreted by surface cells or 
more usually by underlying glands. The mucous membrane in the mouth 
continues as the thin mucosa which lines the bases of the teeth. The main 
component of mucus is a glycoprotein called mucin and the type secreted 
varies according to the region involved. Mucin is viscous, clear, and 
clinging. Underlying the mucous membrane in the mouth is a thin layer 
of smooth muscle tissue and the loose connection to the membrane gives it 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 220 
 
its great elasticity. It covers the cheeks, inner surfaces of the lips, and floor 
of the mouth.  
The roof of the mouth is termed the palate and it separates the oral cavity 
from the nasal cavity. The palate is hard at the front of the mouth since the 
overlying mucosa is covering a plate of bone; it is softer and more pliable at 
the back being made of muscle and connective tissue, and it can move to 
swallow food and liquids. The soft palateends at the uvula. The surface of 
the hard palate allows for the pressure needed in eating food, to leave the 
nasal passage clear. The lips are the mouth's front boundary and 
the fauces (the passageway between the tonsils, also called the throat), mark 
its posterior boundary. At either side of the soft palate are the palatoglossus 
muscles which also reach into regions of the tongue. These muscles raise the 
back of the tongue and also close both sides of the fauces to enable food to 
be swallowed. Mucus helps in the mastication of food in its ability to soften 
and collect the food in the formation of the bolus. 
Salivary glands 
There are three pairs of main salivary glands and between 800 and 1,000 
minor salivary glands, all of which mainly serve the digestive process, and 
also play an important role in the maintenance of dental health and general 
mouth lubrication, without which speech would be impossible. The main 
glands are all exocrine glands, secreting via ducts. All of these glands 
terminate in the mouth. The largest of these are the parotid glands – their 
secretion is mainly serous. The next pair are underneath the jaw, 
the submandibular glands, these produce both serous fluid and mucus. The 
serous fluid is produced by serous glands in these salivary glands which also 
produce lingual lipase. They produce about 70% of the oral cavity saliva. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 221 
 
The third pair are the sublingual glands located underneath the tongue and 
their secretion is mainly mucous with a small percentage of saliva. 
Within the oral mucosa (a mucous membrane) lining the mouth and also on 
the tongue and palates and mouth floor, are the minor salivary glands; their 
secretions are mainly mucous and are innervated by the facial nerve (the 
seventh cranial nerve). The glands also secreteamylase a first stage in the 
breakdown of food acting on the carbohydrate in the food to transform the 
starch content into maltose. There are other glands on the surface of the 
tongue that encircle taste buds on the back part of the tongue and these also 
produce 
lingual 
lipase.Lipase is 
a digestive 
enzyme that 
catalyses 
the hydrolysis of lipids (fats). These glands are termed Von Ebner's 
glands which have also been shown to have another function in the secretion 
of histatins which offer an early defense (outside of the immune system) 
against microbes in food, when it makes contact with these glands on the 
tongue tissue. Sensory information can stimulate the secretion of saliva 
providing the necessary fluid for the tongue to work with and also to ease 
swallowing of the food. 
Saliva 
Saliva functions initially in the digestive system to moisten and soften food 
into the formation of a bolus. The bolus is further helped by the lubrication 
provided by the saliva in its passage from the mouth into the oesophagus. 
Also of importance is the presence in saliva of the digestive 
enzymes amylase and lipase. 
Amylase 
starts 
to 
work 
on 
thestarch in carbohydrates, 
breaking 
it 
down 
into 
the 
simple sugars of maltose and dextrose that can be further broken down in the 
small intestine. Saliva in the mouth can account for 30% of this initial starch 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 222 
 
digestion. Lipase starts to work on breaking down fats. Lipase is further 
produced in the pancreas where it is released to continue this digestion of 
fats. The presence of salivary lipase is of prime importance in young babies 
whose pancreatic lipase has yet to be developed 
As well as its role in supplying digestive enzymes, saliva has a cleansing 
action for the teeth and mouth. It also has an immunological role in 
supplying antibodies to the system, such as immunoglobulin A. This is seen 
to be key in preventing infections of the salivary glands, importantly that 
of parotitis. 
 
Saliva also contains a glycoprotein called haptocorrin which is a binding 
protein to vitamin B12. It binds with the vitamin in order to carry it safely 
through the acidic content of the stomach. When it reaches the duodenum, 
pancreatic enzymes break down the glycoprotein and free the vitamin which 
then binds with intrinsic factor 
Tongue 
Food enters the mouth where the first stage in the digestive process takes 
place, with the action of the tongue and the secretion of saliva. The tongue is 
a fleshy and muscular sensory organ, and the very first sensory information 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 223 
 
is received via the taste buds on its surface. If the taste is agreeable the 
tongue will go into action, manipulating the food in the mouth which 
stimulates the secretion of saliva from the salivary glands. The liquid quality 
of the saliva will help in the softening of the food and its enzyme content 
will start to break down the food whilst it is still in the mouth. The first part 
of the food to be broken down is the starch of carbohydrates. The tongue is 
attached to the floor of the mouth by a ligamentous band called 
the frenum and this gives it great mobility for the manipulation of food 
(and speech); the range of manipulation is optimally controlled by the action 
of several muscles and limited in its external range by the stretch of the 
frenum. The tongue's two sets of muscles, are four intrinsic muscles that 
originate in the tongue and are involved with its shaping, and four extrinsic 
muscles originating in bone that are involved with its movement. 
Taste 
Taste is a form of chemoreception that takes place in the specialised 
receptors of taste cells, contained in structures called taste budsin the mouth. 
Taste buds are mainly on the upper surface (dorsum) of the tongue. Taste 
perception is vital to help prevent harmful or rotten foods from being 
consumed. This is a function of the gustatory system where the taste buds 
are at the forefront. There are taste buds elsewhere in the mouth not just on 
the surface of the tongue. The taste buds are innervated by a branch of the 
facial nerve thechorda tympani, and the glossopharyngeal nerve. Taste 
messages are sent via these cranial nerves to the brain. The brain can 
distinguish between the chemical qualities of the food. The five basic tastes 
are referred to as those of saltiness, sourness, bitterness and sweetness, and 
the most recent addition of a certain savouriness termed umami. The 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 224 
 
detection of saltiness and sourness enables the control of salt and acid 
balance. The detection of bitterness warns of poisons – many of a plant's 
defences are of poisonous compounds that are bitter. Sweetness guides to 
those foods that will supply energy; the initial breakdown of the energy-
giving carbohydrates by salivary amylase creates the taste of sweetness since 
simple sugars are the first result. The taste of umami is thought to signal 
protein-rich food. Sour tastes are acidic which is often found in bad food. 
The brain has to decide very quickly whether to eat the food or not. It was 
the findings in 1991, describing the first olfactory receptors that helped to 
prompt the research into taste. The olfactory receptors are located on cell 
surfaces in the nose which bind to chemicals enabling the detection of 
smells. It is assumed that signals from taste receptors work together with the 
signals from those in the nose, to form an idea of complex food flavours. 
Teeth  
Teeth are complex structures made of materials specific to them. They are 
made of a bone-like material called dentin, which is covered by the hardest 
tissue in the body—enamel. Teeth have different shapes to deal with 
different aspects of mastication employed in tearing and chewing pieces of 
food into smaller and smaller pieces. This results in a much larger surface 
area for the action of digestive enzymes. The teeth are named after their 
particular roles in the process of mastication—incisors are used for cutting 
or 
biting 
off 
pieces 
of 
food; canines, 
are 
used 
for 
tearing, premolars and molars are 
used 
for 
chewing 
and 
grinding. 
Mastication of the food with the help of saliva and mucus results in the 
formation of a soft bolus which can then be swallowed to make its way 
down the upper gastrointestinal tract to the stomach. The digestive enzymes 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 225 
 
in saliva also help in keeping the teeth clean by breaking down any lodged 
food particles. 
Epiglottis 
The epiglottis is a flap that is made of elastic cartilage and attached to the 
entrance of the larynx. It is covered with a mucous membrane and there are 
taste buds on its lingual surface which faces into the mouth. Its laryngeal 
surface faces into the larynx. The epiglottis functions to guard the entrance 
of the glottis, the opening between the vocal folds. It is normally pointed 
upward during breathing with its underside functioning as part of the 
pharynx, but during swallowing, the epiglottis folds down to a more 
horizontal position, with its upper side functioning as part of the pharynx. In 
this manner it prevents food from going into the trachea and instead directs it 
to the oesophagus, which is posterior. During swallowing, the backward 
motion of the tongue forces the epiglottis over the glottis' opening to prevent 
any food that is being swallowed from entering the larynx which leads to the 
lungs; the larynx is also pulled upwards to assist this process. Stimulation of 
the larynx by ingested matter produces a strong cough reflex in order to 
protect the lungs. 
 
Pharynx 
The pharynx is a part of the conducting zone of the respiratory system and 
also a part of the digestive system. It is the part of the throat immediately 
behind the nasal cavity at the back of the mouth and above the oesophagus 
and larynx.The pharynx is made up of three parts. The lower two parts–
the oropharynx and the laryngopharynx are involved in the digestive system. 
The laryngo pharynx connects to the esophagus and it serves as a 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 226 
 
passageway for both air and food. Air enters the larynx anteriorly but 
anything swallowed has priority and the passage of air is temporarily 
blocked. The pharynx is innervated by the pharyngeal plexus of the vagus 
nerve Muscles in the pharynx push the food into the esophagus. The pharynx 
joins the esophagus at the esophageal inlet which is located behind 
the cricoids cartilage. 
 
Esophagus 
The esophagus is a muscular tube connecting the pharynx to the stomach 
that is part of the upper gastrointestinal tract. It carries swallowed masses 
of chewed food along its length. At the inferior end of the esophagus is a 
muscular ring called the lower esophageal sphincter or cardiac sphincter. 
The function of this sphincter is to close of the end of the esophagus and trap 
food in the stomach. 
 
 
 
 
Stomach  
The stomach is a muscular sac that is located on the left side of the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 227 
 
abdominal cavity, just inferior to the diaphragm. In an average person, the 
stomach is about the size of their two fists placed next to each other. This 
major organ acts as a storage tank for food so that the body has time to 
digest large meals properly. The stomach also contains hydrochloric acid 
and digestive enzymes that continue the digestion of food that began in the 
mouth. 
 
 
Small Intestine 
 
The small intestine is a long, thin tube about 1 inch in diameter and about 
10 feet long that is part of the lower gastrointestinal tract. It is located just 
inferior to the stomach and takes up most of the space in the abdominal 
cavity. The entire small intestine is coiled like a hose and the inside surface 
is full of many ridges and folds. These folds are used to maximize the 
digestion of food and absorption of nutrients. By the time food leaves the 
small intestine, around 90% of all nutrients have been extracted from the 
food that entered it.  
 
 
Liver and Gallbladder 
 
The liver is a roughly triangular accessory organ of the digestive system 
located to the right of the stomach, just inferior to the diaphragm and 
superior to the small intestine. The liver weighs about 3 pounds and is the 
second largest organ in the body. The liver has many different functions in 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 228 
 
the body, but the main function of the liver in digestion is the production of 
bile and its secretion into the small intestine. The gallbladder is a small, 
pear-shaped organ located just posterior to the liver. The gallbladder is used 
to store and recycle excess bile from the small intestine so that it can be 
reused for the digestion of subsequent meals. 
 
 
Pancreas 
The pancreas is a large gland located just inferior and posterior to the 
stomach. It is about 6 inches long and shaped like short, lumpy snake with 
its ―head‖ connected to the duodenum and its ―tail‖ pointing to the left wall 
of the abdominal cavity. The pancreas secretes digestive enzymes into the 
small 
intestine 
to 
complete 
the 
chemical 
digestion 
of 
foods.
 
 
Large Intestine 
 
The large intestine is a long, thick tube about 2 ½ inches in diameter and 
about 5 feet long. It is located just inferior to the stomach and wraps around 
the superior and lateral border of the small intestine. The large intestine 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 229 
 
absorbs water and contains many symbiotic bacteria that aid in the breaking 
down of wastes to extract some small amounts of nutrients. Feces in the 
large intestine exit the body through the anal canal. 
The digestive system is responsible for taking whole foods and turning them 
into energy and nutrients to allow the body to function, grow, and repair 
itself. The six primary processes of the digestive system include: 
1. Ingestion of food 
2. Secretion of fluids and digestive enzymes 
3. Mixing and movement of food and wastes through the body 
4. Digestion of food into smaller pieces 
5. Absorption of nutrients 
6. Excretion of wastes 
 
Ingestion 
The first function of the digestive system is ingestion, or the intake of food. 
The mouth is responsible for this function, as it is the orifice through which 
all food enters the body. The mouth and stomach are also responsible for the 
storage of food as it is waiting to be digested. This storage capacity allows 
the body to eat only a few times each day and to ingest more food than it can 
process at one time. 
 
 
Secretion  
In the course of a day, the digestive system secretes around 7 liters of fluids. 
These fluids include saliva, mucus, hydrochloric acid, enzymes, and bile. 
Saliva moistens dry food and contains salivary amylase, a digestive enzyme 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 230 
 
that begins the digestion of carbohydrates. Mucus serves as a protective 
barrier and lubricant inside of the GI tract. Hydrochloric acid helps to digest 
food chemically and protects the body by killing bacteria present in our 
food. Enzymes are like tiny biochemical machines that disassemble large 
macromolecules like proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids into their smaller 
components. Finally, bile is used to emulsify large masses of lipids into tiny 
globules for easy digestion. 
 
 
 
Mixing and Movement  
 
The digestive system uses 3 main processes to move and mix food: 
 Swallowing. Swallowing is the process of using smooth and skeletal muscles 
in the mouth, tongue, and pharynx to push food out of the mouth, through 
the pharynx, and into the esophagus. 
 Peristalsis. Peristalsis is a muscular wave that travels the length of the GI 
tract, moving partially digested food a short distance down the tract. It takes 
many waves of peristalsis for food to travel from the esophagus, through the 
stomach and intestines, and reach the end of the GI tract. 
 Segmentation. Segmentation occurs only in the small intestine as short 
segments of intestine contract like hands squeezing a toothpaste tube. 
Segmentation helps to increase the absorption of nutrients by mixing food 
and increasing its contact with the walls of the intestine. 
Digestion 
Digestion is the process of turning large pieces of food into its component 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 231 
 
chemicals. Mechanical digestion is the physical breakdown of large pieces 
of food into smaller pieces. This mode of digestion begins with the chewing 
of food by the teeth and is continued through the muscular mixing of food 
by the stomach and intestines. Bile produced by the liver is also used to 
mechanically break fats into smaller globules. While food is being 
mechanically digested it is also being chemically digested as larger and more 
complex molecules are being broken down into smaller molecules that are 
easier to absorb. Chemical digestion begins in the mouth with salivary 
amylase in saliva splitting complex carbohydrates into simple carbohydrates. 
The enzymes and acid in the stomach continue chemical digestion, but the 
bulk of chemical digestion takes place in the small intestine thanks to the 
action of the pancreas. The pancreas secretes an incredibly strong digestive 
cocktail known as pancreatic juice, which is capable of digesting lipids, 
carbohydrates, proteins and nucleic acids. By the time food has left 
the duodenum, it has been reduced to its chemical building blocks—fatty 
acids, 
amino 
acids, 
monosaccharides, 
and 
nucleotides. 
 
Absorption 
Once food has been reduced to its building blocks, it is ready for the body to 
absorb. Absorption begins in the stomach with simple molecules like water 
and alcohol being absorbed directly into the bloodstream. Most absorption 
takes place in the walls of the small intestine, which are densely folded to 
maximize the surface area in contact with digested food. Small blood and 
lymphatic vessels in the intestinal wall pick up the molecules and carry them 
to the rest of the body. The large intestine is also involved in the absorption 
of water and vitamins B and K before feces leave the body. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 232 
 
 
 
Excretion 
The final function of the digestive system is the excretion of waste in a 
process known as defecation. Defecation removes indigestible substances 
from the body so that they do not accumulate inside the gut. The timing of 
defecation is controlled voluntarily by the conscious part of the brain, but 
must be accomplished on a regular basis to prevent a backup of indigestible 
materials.  
 
 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 233 
 
 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 234 
 
 
The digestive system consists of the digestive tract and its associated organs. 
The digestive tract is a tube about 7 m (24 ft) long through which food 
passes while it is broken down. The tract consists of the mouth and pharynx 
(throat), esophagus, stomach, the small and large intestines, and the anus. 
The associated digestive organs include three pairs of salivary glands, the 
liver, the pancreas, and the gallbladder. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 235 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 236 
 
 
The peritoneum 
This folded membrane covers and secures the digestive organs and also 
covers the inside of the abdominal wall. 
 
One-way valve 
The pyloric sphincter, which joins the stomach to the small intestine, is one 
of several one-way valves in the digestive tract. 
 
 
Digestive organs, Metabolism 
Metabolism 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 237 
 
The chemical processes that occur within a living organism in order to 
maintain life. 
"The metabolism of fatty acids in the kidney" 
 
How Human Body Metabolism Works 
 
To understand the digestive system and body metabolism, knowing 
the organs involved and what roles they play is the first step, they we 
should learn how metabolism works. The process of metabolism can 
be split up in to two types, anabolism, and catabolism: 
 Anabolism – Also known as constructive metabolism supports the 
storage of energy for use at a later date, as well as cell growth and 
repair. During the process of anabolism, small molecules are 
transformed into larger molecules of fat, protein, and/or 
carbohydrates. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 238 
 
 Catabolism – Also known as destructive metabolism, catabolism 
is the process of breaking down large fat, protein, and/or 
carbohydrate molecules to use for energy. 
A gland called the pancreas secretes hormones to help your body to 
determine whether its main metabolic activity will be catabolic or 
anabolic. 
The speed in which your body metabolized the food that you consume 
varies depending on the individual. An individual‘s rate of 
metabolism is dependent upon the volume of thyroxine that is 
produced within the thyroid; thyroxine being a hormone that regulates 
metabolism. 
Calories and Basal Metabolic Rate 
The chemical process of metabolism is very complex, which has lead 
many people to look at it in the simplest way possible; it affects how 
easily you gain or loose weight. As we eat, we store calories (a calorie 
is a unit of measurement used to determine the quantity of energy 
given to the body by a particular food), the calories we store are later 
metabolized and utilized as energy. But, it is possible to overload on 
calories and end up with an excess amount, which is stored as body 
fat. 
The amount of calories a person can burn in a day is dependent upon 
their basal metabolic rate (BMR), this is the measurement of the rate 
at which a person ―burns‖ calories as energy. The higher a person‘s 
BMR, the faster they can burn calories meaning less are stored as 
body fat. This means that they will be able to eat more and store less. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 239 
 
Although it is thought that a person‘s BMR is inherited, there are 
steps you can take to increase yours. Exercise is the best method, as 
this will not only help you lose calories and stay fit, it is often the case 
that low body fat levels equals low BMR, and vice versa. 
Your Digestive System and How it Works 
 
Digestion is the breakdown of large insoluble food molecules into small 
water-soluble food molecules so that they can be absorbed into the watery 
blood plasma. In certain organisms, these smaller substances are absorbed 
through the small intestine into the blood stream 
The digestive system is a series of hollow organs joined in a long, twisting 
tube from the mouth to the anus (see Figure 1). Inside this tube is a lining 
called the mucosa? In the mouth, stomach, and small intestine, the mucosa 
contains tiny glands that produce juices to help digest food. 
Two solid organs, the liver and the pancreas, produce digestive juices that 
reach the intestine through small tubes. In addition, parts of other organ 
systems (for instance, nerves and blood) play a major role in the digestive 
system. 
Why is digestion important 
Digestion involves the mixing of food, its movement through the digestive 
tract, and the chemical breakdown of the large molecules of food into 
smaller molecules. Digestion begins in the mouth, when we chew and 
swallow, and is completed in the small intestine. The chemical process 
varies somewhat for different kinds of food. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 240 
 
 
Movement of Food Through the System 
The large, hollow organs of the digestive system contain muscle that enables 
their walls to move. The movement of organ walls can propel food and 
liquid and also can mix the contents within each organ. 
Typical movement of the esophagus, stomach, and intestine is called 
peristalsis. The action of peristalsis looks like an ocean wave moving 
through the muscle. 
The muscle of the organ produces a narrowing and then propels the 
narrowed portion slowly down the length of the organ. These waves of 
narrowing push the food and fluid in front of them through each hollow 
organ. 
The first major muscle movement occurs when food or liquid is swallowed. 
Although we are able to start swallowing by choice, once the swallow 
begins, it becomes involuntary and proceeds under the control of the nerves. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 241 
 
The esophagus is the organ into which the swallowed food is pushed. It 
connects the throat above with the stomach below. At the junction of the 
esophagus and stomach, there is a ringlike valve closing the passage 
between the two organs. However, as the food approaches the closed ring, 
the surrounding muscles relax and allow the food to pass. 
The food then enters the stomach, which has three mechanical tasks to do. 
First, the stomach must store the swallowed food and liquid. This requires 
the muscle of the upper part of the stomach to relax and accept large 
volumes of swallowed material. 
The second job is to mix up the food, liquid, and digestive juice produced by 
the stomach. The lower part of the stomach mixes these materials by its 
muscle action. (The mixture is referred to as chyme.) 
The third task of the stomach is to empty its contents slowly into the small 
intestine. 
Several factors affect emptying of the stomach, including the nature of the 
food (mainly its fat and protein content) and the degree of muscle action of 
the emptying stomach and the next organ to receive the contents (the small 
intestine). 
As the food is digested in the small intestine and dissolved into the juices 
from the pancreas, liver, and intestine, the contents of the intestine are mixed 
and pushed forward to allow further digestion. 
Finally, all of the digested nutrients are absorbed through the intestinal 
walls. The waste products of this process include undigested parts of the 
food, known as fiber, and older cells that have been shed from the mucosa. 
These materials are propelled into the colon, where they remain, usually for 
a day or two, until the feces are expelled by a bowel movement. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 242 
 
Small Intestine/Bowel 
The mixture of food, liquid, and digestive juice (chyme) that passes out of 
the stomach, in a regulated controlled manner, enters into the small 
intestine/bowel. The average total length of the normal small bowel in adults 
is about 7 meters/22 feet. The small intestine has 3 segments: 
 the duodenum, 
 the jejunum, and 
 the ileum. 
Each part or section performs an important role in nutrient absorption. 
Duodenum – The chyme first enters into the duodenum where it is exposed 
to secretions that aid digestion. The secretions include bile salts, enzymes, 
and bicarbonate. The bile salts from the liver help digest fats and fat soluble 
vitamins (Vitamin A, D, E, and K). Pancreatic enzymes help digest 
carbohydrates and fats. Bicarbonate from the pancreas neutralizes the acid 
from the stomach. 
Jejunum – The chyme is then further transited down into the second or 
middle part of the small intestine, the jejunum. Mainly in the first half of the 
jejunum, the majority (about 90%) of nutrient absorption occurs involving 
proteins, carbohydrates, vitamins, and minerals. 
Ileum – The ileum is the last section of the small intestine and leads to the 
large intestine or colon. The ileum mainly absorbs water, bile salts, and 
vitamin B12. 
The ileocecal valve is a one-way valve located between the ileum and the 
cecum, which is the first portion of the colon. This valve helps control the 
passage of contents into the colon and increases the contact time of nutrients 
and electrolytes (essential minerals) with the small intestine. It also prevents 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 243 
 
back-flow (reflux) from the colon up into the ileum, and helps minimize the 
movement of bacteria from the large intestine up into the small bowel. 
Large Intestine or Colon 
The primary function of the large intestine or colon is to absorb fluids and 
electrolytes, particularly sodium and potassium, and to convert remaining 
luminal contents into more solid stool. The colon absorbs on average 1–1.5 
liters (about 1–1.5 quarts) of fluid every day and has a capacity to adapt its 
fluid absorption to as much as 5 liters/quarts per day if needed. 
Another function of the colon is to break down (ferment) dietary fiber to 
produce short chain fatty acids – substances that can be absorbed and 
provide added nutrition. 
The first portion of the colon, the cecum, is shaped like a pouch, and is the 
area of storage for the contents arriving from the ileum. The second portion 
is the ascending colon, where fluids are absorbed and where some stool 
formation begins. 
Production of Digestive Juices 
The glands that act first are in the mouth – the salivary glands. Saliva 
produced by these glands contains an enzyme that begins to digest the starch 
from food into smaller molecules. 
The next set of digestive glands is in the stomach lining. They produce 
stomach acid and an enzyme that digests protein. One of the unsolved 
puzzles of the digestive system is why the acid juice of the stomach does not 
dissolve the tissue of the stomach itself. In most people, the stomach mucosa 
is able to resist the juice, although food and other tissues of the body cannot. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 244 
 
After the stomach empties the food and juice mixture into the small 
intestine, the juices of two other digestive organs mix with the food to 
continue the process of digestion. 
One of these organs is the pancreas. It produces a juice that contains a wide 
array of enzymes to break down the carbohydrate, fat, and protein in food. 
Other enzymes that are active in the process come from glands in the wall of 
the intestine or even a part of that wall. 
The liver produces yet another digestive juice – bile. The bile is stored 
between meals in the gallbladder. At mealtime, it is squeezed out of the 
gallbladder into the bile ducts to reach the intestine and mix with the fat in 
our food. The bile acids dissolve the fat into the watery contents of the 
intestine, much like detergents that dissolve grease from a frying pan. After 
the fat is dissolved, it is digested by enzymes from the pancreas and the 
lining of the intestine. 
Absorption and Transport of Nutrients 
Digested molecules of food, as well as water and minerals from the diet, are 
absorbed from the cavity of the upper small intestine. Most absorbed 
materials cross the mucosa into the blood and are carried off in the 
bloodstream to other parts of the body for storage or further chemical 
change. As already noted, this part of the process varies with different types 
of nutrients. 
Carbohydrates. It is recommended that about 55 to 60 percent of total daily 
calories be from carbohydrates. Some of our most common foods contain 
mostly carbohydrates. Examples are bread, potatoes, legumes, rice, 
spaghetti, fruits, and vegetables. Many of these foods contain both starch 
and fiber. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 245 
 
The digestible carbohydrates are broken into simpler molecules by enzymes 
in the saliva, in juice produced by the pancreas, and in the lining of the small 
intestine. 
Starch is digested in two steps: First, an enzyme in the saliva and pancreatic 
juice breaks the starch into molecules called maltose; then an enzyme in the 
lining of the small intestine (maltase) splits the maltose into glucose 
molecules that can be absorbed into the blood. 
Glucose is carried through the bloodstream to the liver, where it is stored or 
used to provide energy for the work of the body. 
Table sugar is another carbohydrate that must be digested to be useful. An 
enzyme in the lining of the small intestine digests table sugar into glucose 
and fructose, each of which can be absorbed from the intestinal cavity into 
the blood. Milk contains yet another type of sugar, lactose, which is changed 
into absorbable molecules by an enzyme called lactase, also found in the 
intestinal lining. 
Protein. Foods such as meat, eggs, and beans consist of giant molecules of 
protein that must be digested by enzymes before they can be used to build 
and repair body tissues. An enzyme in the juice of the stomach starts the 
digestion of swallowed protein. 
Further digestion of the protein is completed in the small intestine. Here, 
several enzymes from the pancreatic juice and the lining of the intestine 
carry out the breakdown of huge protein molecules into small molecules 
called amino acids. These small molecules can be absorbed from the hollow 
of the small intestine into the blood and then be carried to all parts of the 
body to build the walls and other parts of cells. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 246 
 
Fats. Fat molecules are a rich source of energy for the body. The first step in 
digestion of a fat such as butter is to dissolve it into the watery content of the 
intestinal cavity. 
The bile acids produced by the liver act as natural detergents to dissolve fat 
in water and allow the enzymes to break the large fat molecules into smaller 
molecules, some of which are fatty acids and cholesterol. The bile acids 
combine with the fatty acids and cholesterol and help these molecules to 
move into the cells of the mucosa. 
In these cells the small molecules are formed back into large molecules, 
most of which pass into vessels (called lymphatics) near the intestine. These 
small vessels carry the reformed fat to the veins of the chest, and the blood 
carries the fat to storage depots in different parts of the body. 
Vitamins. Another vital part of our food that is absorbed from the small 
intestine is the class of chemicals we call vitamins. The two different types 
of vitamins are classified by the fluid in which they can be dissolved: water-
soluble vitamins (all the B vitamins and vitamin C) and fat-soluble vitamins 
(vitamins A, D, E, and K). 
Water and salt. Most of the material absorbed from the cavity of the small 
intestine is water in which salt is dissolved. The salt and water come from 
the food and liquid we swallow and the juices secreted by the many 
digestive glands. 
How is the digestive process controlled 
Hormone Regulators 
A fascinating feature of the digestive system is that it contains its own 
regulators. The major hormones that control the functions of the digestive 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 247 
 
system are produced and released by cells in the mucosa of the stomach and 
small intestine. These hormones are released into the blood of the digestive 
tract, travel back to the heart and through the arteries, and return to the 
digestive system, where they stimulate digestive juices and cause organ 
movement. 
The hormones that control digestion are gastrin, secretin, and 
cholecystokinin (CCK): 
 Gastrin causes the stomach to produce an acid for dissolving and 
digesting some foods. It is also necessary for the normal growth of the 
lining of the stomach, small intestine, and colon. 
 Secretin causes the pancreas to send out a digestive juice that is rich 
in bicarbonate. It stimulates the stomach to produce pepsin, an 
enzyme that digests protein, and it also stimulates the liver to produce 
bile. 
 CCK causes the pancreas to grow and to produce the enzymes of 
pancreatic juice, and it causes the gallbladder to empty. 
Additional hormones in the digestive system regulate appetite: 
 Ghrelin is produced in the stomach and upper intestine in the absence 
of food in the digestive system and stimulates appetite. 
 Peptide YY is produced in the GI tract in response to a meal in the 
system and inhibits appetite. 
Both of these hormones work on the brain to help regulate the intake of food 
for energy. 
Nerve Regulators 
Two types of nerves help to control the action of the digestive system. 
Extrinsic (outside) nerves come to the digestive organs from the unconscious 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 248 
 
part of the brain or from the spinal cord. They release a chemical called 
acetylcholine and another called adrenaline. Acetylcholine causes the muscle 
of the digestive organs to squeeze with more force and increase the "push" 
of food and juice through the digestive tract. Acetylcholine also causes the 
stomach and pancreas to produce more digestive juice. Adrenaline relaxes 
the muscle of the stomach and intestine and decreases the flow of blood to 
these organs. 
Even more important, though, are the intrinsic (inside) nerves, which make 
up a very dense network embedded in the walls of the esophagus, stomach, 
small intestine, and colon. The intrinsic nerves are triggered to act when the 
walls of the hollow organs are stretched by food. They release many 
different substances that speed up or delay the movement of food and the 
production of juices by the digestive organs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 249 
 
 
 
The Excretory System: 
The excretory system is the system of an organism's body that performs 
the function of excretion, the bodily process of discharging wastes. 
The Excretory system is responsible for the elimination of wastes produced 
by homeostasis. 
 
The excretory system is essential to one‘s health. Its responsibility is to 
remove waste from the body. The excretory system is made up of numerous 
organs that work in unison to ensure that waste is effectively removed from 
your body. Below are the details of the excretory system organs, along with 
the roles they play in detoxification. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 250 
 
Primary Excretory System Organs 
1. Kidneys 
 
. 
 Kidneys are bean-shaped organs of a reddish brown color that are 
found in the sides of the vertebral column. Once the body has 
extracted what it needs from food and drink, it sends the wastes to the 
kidneys. The kidneys filter the wastes, including urea, salt and 
excess water, which are flushed out of the body as urine. 
Wastes in the blood come from tissue breakdown, and from food. 
After the body takes and uses what it needs, it sends the wastes to the 
kidneys. The kidneys are bean-shaped organs, about the size of a 
fist.  Having atleast one kidney is mandatory for living, unless treated 
immidietally. Because of the enormous amounts of blood passing 
through the kidney, kidneys sxtract 180 liters of fluid daily. If we 
extracted all of the fluid as urine, we would lose nutrients and 
dehydrate, Kidneys are responsible for filtering the filtrate and 
returning most of the solutes and water to the blood. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 251 
 
 
2. Skin 
The skin performs its excretory function via the sweat glands. These 
glands produce sweat that contains salt, excess oils, water, and other 
unnecessary substances which are then excreted out of the body 
through small pores. Sweating also helps to cool the body during 
evaporation. Your skin has a very important part in the excretory 
system. It holds moisture into every part of your body. In the 
excretory system, the skins job is to regulate one's body temperature. 
The salt in the skin helps in evaporation of the water off of the body, 
to cool off one who is hot. Sweat is excreted through sweat glands. 
Sweating helps the body maintain a cool, consistent temperature, 
which also helps one maintain homeostasis.  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 252 
 
3. Lungs 
 
The lungs are very important excretory organs as they expel carbon 
dioxide from the body via exhalation. The lungs use cells known as 
alveoli to remove the carbon dioxide from our blood. Otherwise, the 
carbon dioxide would accumulate and have a detrimental effect to our 
body. 
Accessory Excretory System Organs 
1. Liver 
 
Although considered a secondary, or accessary excretory system 
organ, the liver plays a vital part in keeping the body clean. Harmful 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 253 
 
poisons and chemicals that are either produced in the body or 
consumed are broken down and detoxified by the liver. For 
example, a bi-product of the metabolic process within the body is 
ammonia and the liver processes this into urea, a less harmful 
substance which continues to be filtered and excreted by the kidneys 
as urine. When we eat fatty foods, the liver orders the gall bladder to 
release bile into the intestines. The bile then puts the waste products 
into the intestines. Then the intestines absorb the fats into the blood 
stream. The liver is then given the blood, and removes all waste 
products from it as it passes through. The liver removes the iron, 
which involves red blood cell production. Amino acids are then 
broken down and passed into the kidney. The kidney uses these to 
carryout their function in the excretory system. The liver then stores 
the vitamins, and repeats its cycle. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 254 
 
2. Gallbladder 
 
Although the gallbladder does not have a highly significant role to 
play in the excretory system, it does have a function that assists the 
overall process. Bile, a liquid produced by the liver to break down 
waste, is first stored in the gallbladder. When needed, it is 
discharged into the small intestine whose role is to break down fats, 
ethanol and other acidic wastes. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 255 
 
3. Urinary Bladder 
The waste fluid that is created in the liver and collected in the kidney 
is transferred into the urinary bladder where it is temporarily stored 
until the individual urinates. The urinary bladder provides a short 
term solution for storing urine in the body until it is ultimately 
discharged. After the kidneys filter the fluid, the remaining wastes go 
to your bladder. The organ stores the urine, and keeps storing it until 
you can feel it. When you can feel it, it means that the bladder has 
become full, and you must urinate to release the wastes from your 
body. 
  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 256 
 
 
 
4. Ureters 
The ureters tubes of smooth muscle fiber transfer liquid waste 
from the kidneys into the urinary bladder. The urine is moved with 
peristaltic movements which force the urine away from the kidneys. 
The ureters also have ureterovesical valves which ensure the waste 
fluid does not travel back into the kidney. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 257 
 
5. Urethra 
 
The urethra runs through the penis in males, and serves as a carrier 
of semen as well as urine for their ultimate discharge out of the 
body. The urethra tube is shorter in females and is just above the 
vaginal opening. 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 258 
 
7. Large Intestine 
 
Food particles are absorbed into the blood stream via the small 
intestine. The undigested substances are transferred to the large 
intestine which essentially serves as a storage organ for the 
excretory products. The descending, ascending and transverse 
colons also facilitate the absorption of leftover vitamins, water and 
salt. The distal straight section (known as the rectum) is used for the 
storage of waste products (feces) before they are excreted from the 
body via the anal canal with the help of internal and external 
sphincters. 
Common Diseases Affecting Excretory System Organs 
1. Kidney Stones 
Kidney stones are believed to form from crystals that have separated 
from urine, forming hard masses in the urinary tract, though the exact 
cause is unknown.  Symptoms for kidney stones include extreme pain, 
cramping in the lower abdominals and back, nausea, and vomiting. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 259 
 
Most kidney stones can be passed by increasing your intake of water 
to flush them out, although surgery may be needed in some cases. 
2. Urethritis 
Urethritis is a viral or bacterial infection that causes inflammation of 
the urethra. Symptoms for urethritis vary between the sexes. 
 Symptoms for men include pain or swelling of the penis, blood in 
urine or semen, frequent urination and pain during ejaculation. 
 Symptoms for females include pain during urination, abdominal 
pain, fever, chills, frequent urination, vaginal discharge and pelvis 
pain. Urethritis is usually treated with anti-viral medication, or 
antibiotics. Painkillers are often used to help sufferers combat the 
symptoms. 
3. Pyelonephritis 
 
Pyelonephritis is a type of urinary tract infection that travels from the 
urethra or bladder and to the kidneys. This infection occurs when 
bacteria enter the body through the urinary tract. Symptoms include 
frequent urination, burning during urination, blood in the urine, pain 
in the groin and abdominal pain. Pyelonephritis is usually treated with 
oral anti-biotics, although the anti-biotics are sometimes administered 
intravenously in cases of severe infections. 
4. Cystitis 
Cystitis is the medical term for inflammation of the bladder and it is 
one of the most common disease that affects excretory system organs. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 260 
 
As the bladder stores urine before it is excreted from the body, 
bacteria can build up in the bladder and cause cystitis. 
5. Urinary Tract Infection 
Urinary tract infection (UTI) is the infection of the urethra or the 
bladder. The symptoms include abdominal pain, painful or difficult 
urination and fever. The best way to avoid UTI is by drinking loads of 
water. 
 
The Endocrine glands: 
Endocrine glands are glands of the endocrine system that secrete their 
products, hormones, directly into the blood rather than through a duct. 
The major glands of the endocrine system include the  
pineal gland,pituitary gland, pancreas, ovaries, testes, thyroid 
gland, parathyroidgland, hypothalamus and adrenal glands. 
When hormone levels reach a certain normal amount, the endocrine 
system helps the body to keep that level of hormone in the blood. For 
example, if the thyroid gland has secreted the right amount of thyroid 
hormones into the blood, the pituitary gland senses the normal levels 
of 
thyroid 
hormone 
in 
the 
bloodstream. 
Endocrine 
glands are glands of 
the endocrine 
system that secrete 
their 
products, hormones, directly into the blood rather than through a duct. 
The main endocrine glands include the pituitary gland, pancreas, 
ovaries, testes, thyroid gland, and adrenal glands. 
The 
main function of 
endocrine 
glands 
is 
to 
secrete hormones directly 
into 
the 
bloodstream. Hormones are 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 261 
 
chemical substances that affect the activity of another part of the body 
(target site). In essence, hormones serve as messengers, controlling 
and coordinating activities throughout the body. 
 
 
 
Glands are located throughout various parts of the human body. These 
glands take on the critical task of releasing hormones, and as a whole, 
they are most commonly referred to as the endocrine system. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 262 
 
Major endocrine glands and other organs 
Major endocrine glands 
Gland 
Function 
Hypothamlus 
(1) 
The hypothalamus is situated in the brain, at the base of the optic 
chiasm and is attached to the pituitary via a stalk-like structure. It 
acts as a collecting centre for information concerned with the 
internal well being of the body and uses much of this information to 
regulate the secretion of the hormones produced by the pituitary. 
Pituitary (1) 
The pituitary gland is an important gland and it is often referred to 
as the 'master gland', because it controls several of the other 
hormone glands. It is usually about the size of a pea and is situated 
in a bony hollow beneath the base of the brain and just behind the 
bridge of your nose. The gland consists of two parts (often called 
lobes) each of which has different functions. The pituitary gland is 
also sometimes called the Hypophysis. 
Thyroid (1) & 
parathyroid (4) 
The thyroid gland is situated in the front part of the neck, near the 
windpipe. Embedded in the rear surface of this gland are four 
parathyroid glands. The thyroid gland controls many body 
functions, including heart rate, temperature and metabolism. Both 
these glands play a role in the metabolism of calcium in the body. 
Adrenals (2) 
The adrenal glands (each of which weighs about 4 grams and is 
about the size of your thumb) are situated just above the kidneys 
and consist of two parts, the adrenal medulla and the adrenal cortex. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 263 
 
These glands produce hormones which are essential for life and 
help us cope with stress. 
Pineal (1) 
The pineal gland is a tiny body located at the base of the brain. It 
produces the hormone melatonin. 
  
Other organs in the body containing endocrine tissue  
Gland 
Function 
Kidneys (2) 
The kidneys are situated near the middle of the back, just below the 
cage. These glands control the blood fluid and mineral levels within 
body by processing the blood to remove waste products and any exc
fluid. 
 Ovaries (2) 
The ovaries are situated either side of the uterus. In addition to containi
the egg cells necessary for reproduction, they produce the hormon
Oestrogen and Progesterone which are necessary for menstruation a
producing the other female sexual characteristics. 
 Testes (2) 
The testes are situated in a pouch that hangs outside the male body. Th
produce the hormones necessary for the production of sperm and the oth
male sexual characteristics. 
 Pancreas (1) In addition to its digestive functions, cells in the pancreas regulate 
blood sugar that provides the body with energy. 
Hypothalamus 
The hypothalamus is a part of the brain located superior and anterior to the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 264 
 
brain stem and inferior to the thalamus. It serves many different functions in 
the nervous system, and is also responsible for the direct control of the 
endocrine system through the pituitary gland. The hypothalamus contains 
special cells called neurosecretory cells—neurons that secrete hormones: 
 Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) 
 Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) 
 Growth hormone-inhibiting hormone (GHIH) 
 Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 
 Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) 
 Oxytocin 
 Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) 
All of the releasing and inhibiting hormones affect the function of the 
anterior pituitary gland. TRH stimulates the anterior pituitary gland to 
release thyroid-stimulating hormone. GHRH and GHIH work to regulate the 
release of growth hormone—GHRH stimulates growth hormone release, 
GHIH inhibits its release. GnRH stimulates the release of follicle stimulating 
hormone and luteinizing hormone while CRH stimulates the release of 
adrenocorticotropic hormone. The last two hormones—oxytocin and 
antidiuretic hormone—are produced by the hypothalamus and transported to 
the posterior pituitary, where they are stored and later released. 
Pineal Gland 
 
The pineal gland is a small pinecone-shaped mass of glandular tissue found 
just posterior to the thalamus of the brain. The pineal gland produces the 
hormone melatonin that helps to regulate the human sleep-wake cycle 
known as the circadian rhythm. The activity of the pineal gland is inhibited 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 265 
 
by stimulation from the photoreceptors of the retina. This light sensitivity 
causes melatonin to be produced only in low light or darkness. Increased 
melatonin production causes humans to feel drowsy at nighttime when the 
pineal gland is active. 
 
Thymus 
The thymus is a soft, triangular-shaped organ found in the chest posterior to 
the sternum. The thymus produces hormones called thymosins that help to 
train and develop T-lymphocytes during fetal development and childhood. 
The T-lymphocytes produced in the thymus go on to protect the body from 
pathogens throughout a person‘s entire life. The thymus becomes inactive 
during puberty and is slowly replaced by adipose tissue throughout a 
person‘s life. 
 
 
Gonads 
The gonads—ovaries in females and testes in males—are responsible for 
producing the sex hormones of the body. These sex hormones determine the 
secondary sex characteristics of adult females and adult males. 
 Testes: The testes are a pair of ellipsoid organs found in the scrotum of 
males that produce the androgen testosterone in males after the start of 
puberty. Testosterone has effects on many parts of the body, including the 
muscles, bones, sex organs, and hair follicles. This hormone causes growth 
and increases in strength of the bones and muscles, including the accelerated 
growth of long bones during adolescence. During puberty, testosterone 
controls the growth and development of the sex organs and body hair of 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 266 
 
males, including pubic, chest, and facial hair. In men who have inherited 
genes for baldness testosterone triggers the onset of androgenic alopecia, 
commonly known as male pattern baldness. 
 Ovaries: The ovaries are a pair of almond-shaped glands located in the 
pelvic body cavity lateral and superior to the uterus in females. The ovaries 
produce the female sex hormones progesterone and estrogens. Progesterone 
is most active in females during ovulation and pregnancy where it maintains 
appropriate conditions in the human body to support a developing fetus. 
Estrogens are a group of related hormones that function as the primary 
female sex hormones. The release of estrogen during puberty triggers the 
development of female secondary sex characteristics such as uterine 
development, breast development, and the growth of pubic hair. Estrogen 
also triggers the increased growth of bones during adolescence that lead to 
adult height and proportions. 
 
The main glands and organs of the endocrine system include: 
Pituitary gland – is inside the brain. It oversees the other glands and keeps 
hormone levels in check. It can bring about a change in hormone production 
somewhere else in the system by releasing its own ‗stimulating‘ hormones. 
The pituitary gland is also connected to the nervous system through part of 
the brain called the hypothalamus. The hormones released by the pituitary 
gland are gonadotropins (LH and FSH), growth hormone (GH), thyroid 
stimulating hormone (TSH), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 
prolactin, 
antidiuretic 
hormone 
and 
oxytocin.  
The pituitary gland, also known as the hypophysis, is a small pea-sized 
lump of tissue connected to the inferior portion of the hypothalamus of the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 267 
 
brain. Many blood vesselssurround the pituitary gland to carry the hormones 
it releases throughout the body. Situated in a small depression in 
the sphenoid bone called the sella turcica, the pituitary gland is actually 
made of 2 completely separate structures: the posterior and anterior pituitary 
glands. 
1. Posterior Pituitary: The posterior pituitary gland is actually not glandular 
tissue at all, but nervous tissue instead. The posterior pituitary is a small 
extension of the hypothalamus through which the axons of some of the 
neurosecretory cells of the hypothalamus extend. These neurosecretory cells 
create 2 hormones in the hypothalamus that are stored and released by the 
posterior pituitary:   
2.  
1. Oxytocin triggers uterine contractions during childbirth and the 
release of milk during breastfeeding. 
2. Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) prevents water loss in the body by 
increasing the re-uptake of water in the kidneys and reducing 
blood flow to sweat glands. 
3. Anterior Pituitary: The anterior pituitary gland is the true glandular 
part of the pituitary gland. The function of the anterior pituitary gland 
is controlled by the releasing and inhibiting hormones of the 
hypothalamus. The anterior pituitary produces 6 important hormones:  
 
 
1. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), as its name suggests, is a 
tropic hormone responsible for the stimulation of the thyroid 
gland. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 268 
 
2. Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulates the adrenal 
cortex, the outer part of the adrenal gland, to produce its 
hormones. 
3. Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) stimulates the follicle cells 
of the gonads to produce gametes—ova in females and sperm in 
males. 
4. Luteinizing hormone (LH) stimulates the gonads to produce the 
sex hormones—estrogens in females and testosterone in males. 
5. Human growth hormone (HGH) affects many target cells 
throughout the body by stimulating their growth, repair, and 
reproduction. 
6. Prolactin (PRL) has many effects on the body, chief of which is 
that it stimulates the mammary glands of the breast to produce 
milk. 
  
Thyroid gland – sits in the neck at the front of the windpipe. It releases 
thyroid hormone (T4 and T3) which is required for metabolism and body 
homeostasis. It is controlled by TSH which is produced by the pituitary 
gland through a feed-back loop. The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped 
gland located at the base of the neck and wrapped around the lateral sides of 
the trachea. The thyroid gland produces 3 major hormones:  
 
Calcitonin 
 Triiodothyronine (T3) 
 Thyroxine (T4) 
 Calcitonin is released when calcium ion levels in the blood rise above a 
certain set point. Calcitonin functions to reduce the concentration of calcium 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 269 
 
ions in the blood by aiding the absorption of calcium into the matrix of 
bones. The hormones T3 and T4 work together to regulate the body‘s 
metabolic rate. Increased levels of T3 and T4 lead to increased cellular 
activity and energy usage in the body 
 Parathyroid gland – there are usually four parathyroid glands which lie 
alongside the thyroid gland. The parathyroid gland is involved in calcium, 
phosphate and vitamin D regulation. The parathyroid glands are 4 small 
masses of glandular tissue found on the posterior side of the thyroid gland. 
The parathyroid glands produce the hormone parathyroid hormone (PTH), 
which is involved in calcium ion homeostasis. PTH is released from the 
parathyroid glands when calcium ion levels in the blood drop below a set 
point. PTH stimulates the osteoclasts to break down the calcium containing 
bone matrix to release free calcium ions into the bloodstream. PTH also 
triggers the kidneys to return calcium ions filtered out of the blood back to 
the bloodstream so that it is conserved. 
Adrenal glands – there are two adrenal glands which sit on top of each 
kidney. They make a number of different hormones. The outside part of the 
gland (adrenal cortex) makes cortisol, aldosterone and sex hormones. The 
centre of the adrenal gland (adrenal medulla) makes adrenaline. Adrenaline 
is an example of a hormone that is under the control of the nervous system. 
The adrenal glands are a pair of roughly triangular glands found 
immediately superior to the kidneys. The adrenal glands are each made of 2 
distinct layers, each with their own unique functions: the outer adrenal 
cortex and inner adrenal medulla. 
 Adrenal cortex: The adrenal cortex produces many cortical hormones in 3 
classes: glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and androgens.  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 270 
 
  
 
 
1. Glucocorticoids have many diverse functions, including the breakdown of 
proteins and lipids to produce glucose. Glucocorticoids also function to 
reduce inflammation and immune response. 
2. Mineralocorticoids, as their name suggests, are a group of hormones that 
help to regulate the concentration of mineral ions in the body. 
3. Androgens, such as testosterone, are produced at low levels in the adrenal 
cortex to regulate the growth and activity of cells that are receptive to male 
hormones. In adult males, the amount of androgens produced by the testes is 
many times greater than the amount produced by the adrenal cortex, leading 
to the appearance of male secondary sex characteristics. 
 Adrenal medulla: The adrenal medulla produces the hormones epinephrine 
and norepinephrine under stimulation by the sympathetic division of the 
autonomic nervous system. Both of these hormones help to increase the flow 
of blood to the brain and muscles to improve the ―fight-or-flight‖ response 
to stress. These hormones also work to increase heart rate, breathing rate, 
and blood pressure while decreasing the flow of blood to and function of 
organs that are not involved in responding to emergencies. 
  
 Pancreas – an organ of digestion which is inside the abdomen. It makes 
insulin, which controls the amount of sugar in the bloodstream. It also makes 
other hormones such as glucagon and somatostatin. The pancreas is a large 
gland located in the abdominal cavity just inferior and posterior to 
the stomach. The pancreas is considered to be a heterocrine gland as it 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 271 
 
contains both endocrine and exocrine tissue. The endocrine cells of the 
pancreas make up just about 1% of the total mass of the pancreas and are 
found in small groups throughout the pancreas called islets of Langerhans. 
Within these islets are 2 types of cells—alpha and beta cells. The alpha cells 
produce the hormone glucagon, which is responsible for raising blood 
glucose levels. Glucagon triggers muscle and liver cells to break down the 
polysaccharide glycogen to release glucose into the bloodstream. The beta 
cells produce the hormone insulin, which is responsible for lowering blood 
glucose levels after a meal. Insulin triggers the absorption of glucose from 
the blood into cells, where it is added to glycogen molecules for storage. 
 Ovaries – are inside the female pelvis. They make female sex hormones like 
oestrogen. 
 Testes – they hang in the male scrotal sack. They make male sex hormones 
like testosterone. 
Other lesser known endocrine organs include: 
 Adipose tissue (fat tissue) – is recognised to be metabolically important. It 
releases hormones such as leptin, which affect appetite, and is also a site of 
oestrogen production. Insulin also acts on adipose tissue. 
 Kidneys – produce erythropoietin (EPO) which stimulates red blood cell 
production, produce renin which is needed for blood pressure regulation and 
produce the active form of Vitamin D (1–25 dihydroxy vitamin D3) 
 Gut – an increasing number of hormones in the gut are being researched and 
being understood to effect metabolism and appetite. Included are glucagon-
like peptide 1 (GLP–1), ghrelin which stimulates appetite, and somatostatin. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 272 
 
Problems of the endocrine system 
 
Numerous problems can occur in the endocrine system. These can be 
considered as excessive or deficient hormone production. Endocrine organs 
are also prone to tumours (adenomas) which can over produce hormones. 
Some problems of the endocrine system include: 
 Diabetes – too much sugar in the blood caused by problems with insulin 
production. This includes type 1 diabetes (deficiency of insulin) and type 2 
diabetes (initially excessive, then deficiency, of insulin). 
 Menstruation 
abnormalities – 
irregular 
menstruation 
or 
lack of 
menstruation. Some causes of this include polycystic ovarian syndrome 
(PCOS), pituitary adenoma or primary ovarian failure (POF). 
 Thyroid problems – when the gland is overactive (hyperthyroidism) or 
underactive (hypothyroidism). Thyroid nodules are common but thyroid 
cancers are rare. 
 Parathyroid problems – an enlargement or one of more of the parathyroid 
glands can lead to high calcium levels in the blood (hypercalcemia). 
 Pituitary adenomas – these are tumours of the pituitary gland that can 
make too much of a certain hormone or cause deficiencies of hormones. 
These tumours can be small (microadenomas) or large (macroadenomas). 
 Neuro-endocrine tumours – these are rare to tumours of certain endocrine 
glands (usually the adrenal gland, pancreas or small bowel). These can 
include 
too 
much 
adrenaline 
released 
by 
the 
adrenal 
gland 
(pheochromocytoma), or too much hormone 5–HIAA from a carcinoid 
tumour which causes diarrhoea and flushing. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 273 
 
 
 
Functions of the endocrine system 
 
Some of the roles of the endocrine system include: 
 Growth 
 Repair 
 Sexual reproduction 
 Digestion 
 Homeostasis (constant internal balance). 
 
How hormones work 
 
A hormone will only act on a part of the body if it ‗fits‘. A hormone can be 
thought of as a key, and its target site (such as an organ) has specially 
shaped locks on the cell walls. If the hormone fits the cell wall, then it will 
work. 
 
 
The hormones can set off a cascade of other signaling pathways in the cell to 
cause an immediate effect (for instance, insulin signaling leads to a rapid 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 274 
 
uptake of glucose into muscle cells) or a more delayed effect 
(glucocorticoids bind to DNA elements in a cell to switch on the production 
of certain proteins, which takes a while to produce).  
 
 
The endocrine system is a tightly regulated system that keeps the hormones 
and their effects at just the right level. One way this is achieved is through 
‗feedback loops‘. The release of hormones is regulated by other hormones, 
proteins or neuronal signals. 
  
 
The released hormone then has its effect on other organs. This effect on the 
organ feeds back to the original signal to control any further hormone 
release. The pituitary gland is well known for its feedback loops 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 275 
 
 
Other Hormone Producing Organs 
 
In addition to the glands of the endocrine system, many other non-glandular 
organs and tissues in the body produce hormones as well.   
 Heart: The cardiac muscle tissue of the heart is capable of producing the 
hormone atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) in response to high blood 
pressure levels. ANP works to reduce blood pressure by triggering 
vasodilation to provide more space for the blood to travel through. ANP also 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 276 
 
reduces blood volume and pressure by causing water and salt to be excreted 
out of the blood by the kidneys. 
 Kidneys: The kidneys produce the hormone erythropoietin (EPO) in 
response to low levels of oxygen in the blood. EPO released by the kidneys 
travels to the red bone marrow where it stimulates an increased production 
of red blood cells. The number of red blood cells increases the oxygen 
carrying capacity of the blood, eventually ending the production of EPO. 
 Digestive System: The hormones cholecystokinin (CCK), secretin, and 
gastrin are all produced by the organs of the gastrointestinal tract. CCK, 
secretin, and gastrin all help to regulate the secretion of pancreatic juice, 
bile, and gastric juice in response to the presence of food in the stomach. 
CCK is also instrumental in the sensation of satiety or ―fullness‖ after eating 
a meal.  
 Adipose: Adipose tissue produces the hormone leptin that is involved in the 
management of appetite and energy usage by the body. Leptin is produced at 
levels relative to the amount of adipose tissue in the body, allowing the brain 
to monitor the body‘s energy storage condition. When the body contains a 
sufficient level of adipose for energy storage, the level of leptin in the blood 
tells the brain that the body is not starving and may work normally. If the 
level of adipose or leptin decreases below a certain threshold, the body 
enters starvation mode and attempts to conserve energy through increased 
hunger and food intake and decreased energy usage. Adipose tissue also 
produces very low levels of estrogens in both men and women. In obese 
people the large volume of adipose tissue may lead to abnormal estrogen 
levels. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 277 
 
 Placenta: In pregnant women, the placenta produces several hormones that 
help to maintain pregnancy. Progesterone is produced to relax the uterus, 
protect the fetus from the mother‘s immune system, and prevent premature 
delivery of the fetus. Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) assists 
progesterone by signaling the ovaries to maintain the production of estrogen 
and progesterone throughout pregnancy. 
 Local Hormones: Prostaglandins and leukotrienes are produced by every 
tissue in the body (except for blood tissue) in response to damaging stimuli. 
These two hormones mainly affect the cells that are local to the source of 
damage, leaving the rest of the body free to function normally.  
 
1. Prostaglandins cause swelling, inflammation, increased pain sensitivity, and 
increased local body temperature to help block damaged regions of the body 
from infection or further damage. They act as the body‘s natural bandages to 
keep pathogens out and swell around damaged joints like a natural cast to 
limit movement.  
2. Leukotrienes help the body heal after prostaglandins have taken effect by 
reducing inflammation while helping white blood cells to move into the 
region to clean up pathogens and damaged tissues. 
 
 
Endocrine System vs. Nervous System Function 
 
The endocrine system works alongside of the nervous system to form the 
control systems of the body. The nervous system provides a very fast and 
narrowly targeted system to turn on specific glands and muscles throughout 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 278 
 
the body. The endocrine system, on the other hand, is much slower acting, 
but has very widespread, long lasting, and powerful effects. Hormones are 
distributed by glands through the bloodstream to the entire body, affecting 
any cell with a receptor for a particular hormone. Most hormones affect cells 
in several organs or throughout the entire body, leading to many diverse and 
powerful 
responses.    
 
Hormone Properties 
 
Once hormones have been produced by glands, they are distributed through 
the body via the bloodstream. As hormones travel through the body, they 
pass through cells or along the plasma membranes of cells until they 
encounter a receptor for that particular hormone. Hormones can only affect 
target cells that have the appropriate receptors. This property of hormones is 
known as specificity. Hormone specificity explains how each hormone can 
have specific effects in widespread parts of the body. 
 
 
Many hormones produced by the endocrine system are classified as tropic 
hormones. A tropic hormone is a hormone that is able to trigger the release 
of another hormone in another gland. Tropic hormones provide a pathway of 
control for hormone production as well as a way for glands to be controlled 
in distant regions of the body. Many of the hormones produced by the 
pituitary gland, such as TSH, ACTH, and FSH are tropic hormones. 
 
Hormonal Regulation 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 279 
 
 
The levels of hormones in the body can be regulated by several factors. The 
nervous system can control hormone levels through the action of the 
hypothalamus and its releasing and inhibiting hormones. For example, TRH 
produced by the hypothalamus stimulates the anterior pituitary to produce 
TSH. Tropic hormones provide another level of control for the release of 
hormones. For example, TSH is a tropic hormone that stimulates the thyroid 
gland to produce T3 and T4. Nutrition can also control the levels of 
hormones in the body. For example, the thyroid hormones T3 and T4 require 
3 or 4 iodine atoms, respectively, to be produced. In people lacking iodine in 
their diet, they will fail to produce sufficient levels of thyroid hormones to 
maintain a healthy metabolic rate. Finally, the number of receptors present in 
cells can be varied by cells in response to hormones. Cells that are exposed 
to high levels of hormones for extended periods of time can begin to reduce 
the number of receptors that they produce, leading to reduced hormonal 
control of the cell.  
 
Classes of Hormones 
 
Hormones are classified into 2 categories depending on their chemical 
make-up and solubility: water-soluble and lipid-soluble hormones. Each of 
these classes of hormones has specific mechanisms for their function that 
dictate how they affect their target cells. 
 Water-soluble hormones: Water-soluble hormones include the peptide and 
amino-acid hormones such as insulin, epinephrine, HGH, and oxytocin. As 
their name indicates, these hormones are soluble in water. Water-soluble 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 280 
 
hormones are unable to pass through the phospholipid bilayer of the plasma 
membrane and are therefore dependent upon receptor molecules on the 
surface of cells. When a water-soluble hormone binds to a receptor molecule 
on the surface of a cell, it triggers a reaction inside of the cell. This reaction 
may change a factor inside of the cell such as the permeability of the 
membrane or the activation of another molecule. A common reaction is to 
cause molecules of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) to be 
synthesized from adenosine triphosphate (ATP) present in the cell. cAMP 
acts as a second messenger within the cell where it binds to a second 
receptor to change the function of the cell‘s physiology. 
 Lipid-soluble hormones: Lipid-soluble hormones include the steroid 
hormones 
such 
as 
testosterone, 
estrogens, 
glucocorticoids, 
and 
mineralocorticoids. Because they are  soluble in lipids, these hormones are 
able to pass directly through the phospholipid bilayer of the plasma 
membrane and bind directly to receptors inside the cell nucleus. Lipid-
soluble hormones are able to directly control the function of a cell from 
these receptors, often triggering the transcription of particular genes in the 
DNA to produce "messenger RNAs (mRNAs)" that are used to make 
proteins that affect the cell‘s growth and function.  
 
 
 
Nervous systems: 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 281 
 
 
The nervous system is a complex collection of nerves and specialized cells 
known as neurons that transmit signals between different parts of the body. 
It is essentially the body‘s electrical wiring. Nerves are cylindrical bundles 
of fibers that start at the brain and central cord and branch out to every other 
part of the body. Every minute of every day, your nervous system is sending 
and receiving countless messages about what is happening both inside and 
around your body. Right now, your nervous system is receiving sensory 
input from your eyes about the words on the screen, from your ears about the 
sound of the computer, from your skin about the feel of your clothes, etc. At 
the same time, your brain is receiving information from sensors that monitor 
your heartrate, blood pressure, levels of oxygen and the contents of your 
stomach and intestines. Your brain then interprets all of these signals, which 
allows for an understanding of the words on the screen, the recognition of 
the noise as computer noise, and the development of motor responses such 
as moving your eyeballs, changing positions in your chair, and decreasing or 
increasing your heartrate and digestion. In short, your nervous system 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 282 
 
coordinates all the activities of your body. This module will provide a 
general overview of the nervous system as a whole. A word of caution: A 
system capable of so many sophisticated and complicated functions has to be 
extremely complex. One module cannot possibly present all the information 
about the nervous system, and it will probably take a few trips through the 
nervous system before the pieces fall into place, so don't despair if you're a 
bit confused. An Introduction to Nervous Systems presents the principles of 
neurobiology from an evolutionary perspective—from single–celled 
organisms to complex invertebrates such as flies—and is ideal for use as a 
supplemental textbook. Greenspan describes the mechanisms that allow 
behavior to become ever more sophisticated—from simple avoidance 
behavior of Paramecium through to the complex cognitive behaviors of the 
honeybee—and shows how these mechanisms produce the increasing neural 
complexity found in these organisms. The book ends with a discussion of 
what is universal about nervous systems and what may be required, 
neurobiologically, to be human. This novel and highly readable presentation 
of fundamental principles of neurobiology is designed to be accessible to 
undergraduate and graduate students not already steeped in the subject. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 283 
 
 
The Central nervous system is made up of the brain and spinal cord and The 
Peripheral nervous system is made up of the Somatic and the 
Autonomic nervous 
systems. 
The 
Central nervous 
system. 
The 
central nervous system is divided into two major parts: the brain and the 
spinal cord. Thenervous system has two major parts: the central nervous 
system(CNS) 
and 
the 
peripheral nervous 
system (PNS). 
The 
central systemis the primary control center for the body and is composed of 
the brain and spinal cord. he nervous system has three main functions: 
gathering sensory input, integrating data, and forming motor output. 
Neurons sense external stimuli through receptors in the body, providing the 
first major function of the nervous system—gathering sensory input. The 
nervous system consists of the brain, spinal cord, and a complex network of 
neurons. This system is responsible for sending, receiving, and interpreting 
information from all parts of the body. The nervous system monitors and 
coordinates internal organ function and responds to changes in the external 
environment. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 284 
 
The nervous system is a complex network of nerves and cells that carry 
messages to and from the brain and spinal cord to various parts of the body. 
The nervous system includes both the Central nervous system and Peripheral 
nervous system. The Central nervous system is made up of the brain and 
spinal cord and The Peripheral nervous system is made up of the Somatic 
and the Autonomic nervous systems. 
 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 285 
 
In vertebrates the system has two main divisions, the central and the 
peripheral nervous systems. The central nervous system consists of 
the brain and spinal cord. Linked to these are the cranial, spinal, and 
autonomic nerves, which, with their branches, constitute the peripheral 
nervous system. The brain might be compared to a computer and its memory 
banks, the spinal cord to the conducting cable for the computer's input and 
output, and the nerves to a circuit supplying input information to the cable 
and transmitting the output to muscles and organs. 
The nervous system is built up of nerve cells, called neurons, which are 
supported and protected by other cells. Of the 200 billion or so neurons 
making up the human nervous system, approximately half are found in the 
brain. From the cell body of a typical neuron extend one or more outgrowths 
(dendrites), threadlike structures that divide and subdivide into ever smaller 
branches. Another, usually longer structure called the axon also stretches 
from the cell body. It sometimes branches along its length but always 
branches at its microscopic tip. When the cell body of a neuron is chemically 
stimulated, it generates an impulse that passes from the axon of one neuron 
to the dendrite of another; the junction between axon and dendrite is called 
a synapse. Such impulses carry information throughout the nervous system. 
Electrical impulses may pass directly from axon to axon, from axon to 
dendrite, or from dendrite to dendrite. 
So-called white matter in the central nervous system consists primarily of 
axons coated with light-colored myelin produced by certain neuroglial cells. 
Nerve cell bodies that are not coated with white matter are known as gray 
matter. Nonmyelinated axons that are outside the central nervous system are 
enclosed only in a tubelike neurilemma sheath composed of Schwann cells, 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 286 
 
which are necessary for nerve regeneration. There are regular intervals along 
peripheral axons where the myelin sheath is interrupted. These areas, called 
nodes of Ranvier, are the points between which nerve impulses, in 
myelinated fibers, jump, rather than pass, continuously along the fiber (as is 
the case in unmyelinated fibers). Transmission of impulses is faster in 
myelinated nerves, varying from about 3 to 300 ft (1–91 m) per sec. 
Both myelinated and unmyelinated dendrites and axons are termed nerve 
fibers; a nerve is a bundle of nerve fibers; a cluster of nerve cell bodies 
(neurons) on a peripheral nerve is called a ganglion. Neurons are located 
either in the brain, in the spinal cord, or in peripheral ganglia. Grouped and 
interconnected ganglia form a plexus, or nerve center. Sensory (afferent) 
nerve fibers deliver impulses from receptor terminals in the skin and organs 
to the central nervous system via the peripheral nervous system. Motor 
(efferent) fibers carry impulses from the central nervous system to effector 
terminals in muscles and glands via the peripheral system. 
The peripheral system has 12 pairs of cranial nerves: olfactory, optic, 
oculomotor, trochlear, trigeminal, abducent, facial, vestibulo-cochlear 
(formerly known as acoustic), glossopharyngeal, vagus, spinal accessory, 
and hypoglossal. These have their origin in the brain and primarily control 
the activities of structures in the head and neck. The spinal nerves arise in 
the spinal cord, 31 pairs radiating to either side of the body: 8 cervical, 12 
thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral, and 1 coccygeal. 
Autonomic Nervous System 
The autonomic nerve fibers form a subsidiary system that regulates the iris 
of the eye and the smooth-muscle action of the heart, blood vessels, glands, 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 287 
 
lungs, stomach, colon, bladder, and other visceral organs not subject to 
willful control. Although the autonomic nervous system's impulses originate 
in the central nervous system, it performs the most basic human functions 
more or less automatically, without conscious intervention of higher brain 
centers. Because it is linked to those centers, however, the autonomic system 
is influenced by the emotions; for example, anger can increase the rate of 
heartbeat. All of the fibers of the autonomic nervous system are motor 
channels, and their impulses arise from the nerve tissue itself, so that the 
organs they innervate perform more or less involuntarily and do not require 
stimulation to function. 
Autonomic nerve fibers exit from the central nervous system as part of other 
peripheral nerves but branch from them to form two more subsystems: the 
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems, the actions of which 
usually oppose each other. For example, sympathetic nerves cause arteries to 
contract while parasympathetic nerves cause them to dilate. Sympathetic 
impulses are conducted to the organs by two or more neurons. The cell body 
of the first lies within the central nervous system and that of the second in an 
external ganglion. Eighteen pairs of such ganglia interconnect by nerve 
fibers to form a double chain just outside the spine and running parallel to it. 
Parasympathetic impulses are also relayed by at least two neurons, but the 
cell body of the second generally lies near or within the target organ. 
Autonomic Nervous System 
Another part of the nervous system is the Autonomic Nervous System. It has 
three parts: 
 the sympathetic nervous system 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 288 
 
 the parasympathetic nervous system 
 the enteric nervous system 
This nervous system controls the nerves of the inner organs of the body on 
which humans have no conscious control. This includes the heartbeat, 
digestion, breathing (except conscious breathing) etc. 
The nerves of the autonomic nervous system enervate the smooth 
involuntary muscles of the (internal organs) and glands and cause them to 
function and secrete their enzymes etc. 
The Enteric nervous system is the third part of the autonomic nervous 
system. The enteric nervous system is a complex network of nerve fibers 
that innervate the organs within the abdomen like the gastrointestinal tract, 
pancreas, gall bladder etc. It contains nearly 100 million nerves. 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 289 
 
 
 
Somatic nervous system 
The somatic nervous system consists of peripheral nerve fibers that pick up 
sensory information or sensations from the peripheral or distant organs 
(those away from the brain like limbs) and carry them to the central nervous 
system. 
These also consist of motor nerve fibers that come out of the brain and take 
the messages for movement and necessary action to the skeletal muscles. For 
example, on touching a hot object the sensory nerves carry information 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 290 
 
about the heat to the brain, which in turn, via the motor nerves, tells the 
muscles of the hand to withdraw it immediately. 
The whole process takes less than a second to happen. The cell body of the 
neuron that carries the information often lies within the brain or spinal cord 
and projects directly to a skeletal muscle. 
 
The nervous system consists of the brain, spinal cord, sensory organs, and all 
of the nerves that connect these organs with the rest of the body. Together, 
these organs are responsible for the control of the body and communication 
among its parts. The brain and spinal cord form the control center known as 
the central nervous system (CNS), where information is evaluated and 
decisions made. The sensory nerves and sense organs of the peripheral 
nervous system (PNS) monitor conditions inside and outside of the body and 
send this information to the CNS. Efferent nerves in the PNS carry signals 
from the control center to the muscles, glands, and organs to regulate their 
functions. 
 
 
Nervous Tissue 
 
The majority of the nervous system is tissue made up of two classes of cells: 
neurons and neuroglia. 
 
Neurons. Neurons, also known as nerve cells, communicate within the body 
by transmitting electrochemical signals. Neurons look quite different from 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 291 
 
other cells in the body due to the many long cellular processes that extend 
from their central cell body. The cell body is the roughly round part of a 
neuron that contains the nucleus, mitochondria, and most of the cellular 
organelles. Small tree-like structures called dendrites extend from the cell 
body to pick up stimuli from the environment, other neurons, or sensory 
receptor cells. Long transmitting processes called axons extend from the cell 
body to send signals onward to other neurons or effect or cells in the body.  
The smallest worker in the nervous system is the neuron. For each of the 
chain of impulses there is one preganglionic neuron, or one before the cell 
body or ganglion, that is like a central controlling body for numerous 
neurons going out peripherally. 
The preganglionic neuron is located in either the brain or the spinal cord. In 
the autonomic nervous system this preganglionic neuron projects to an 
autonomic ganglion. The postganglionic neuron then projects to the target 
organ. 
In the somatic nervous system there is only one neuron between the central 
nervous system and the target organ while the autonomic nervous system 
uses two neurons. 
 
There are 3 basic classes of neurons: afferent neurons, efferent neurons, and 
inter neurons. 
1. Afferent neurons. Also known as sensory neurons, afferent neurons transmit 
sensory signals to the central nervous system from receptors in the body. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 292 
 
 
  
2. Efferent neurons. Also known as motor neurons, efferent neurons transmit 
signals from the central nervous system to effectors in the body such as 
muscles and glands. 
 
  
3. Interneurons. Interneurons form complex networks within the central 
nervous system to integrate the information received from afferent neurons 
and to direct the function of the body through efferent neurons. 
 
 
 Neuroglia. Neuroglia, also known as glial cells, act as the ―helper‖ cells of 
the nervous system. Each neuron in the body is surrounded by anywhere 
from 6 to 60 neuroglia that protect, feed, and insulate the neuron. Because 
neurons are extremely specialized cells that are essential to body function 
and almost never reproduce, neuroglia are vital to maintaining a functional 
nervous system. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 293 
 
The brain, a soft, wrinkled organ that weighs about 3 pounds, is located 
inside the cranial cavity, where the bones of the skull surround and protect it. 
The approximately 100 billion neurons of the brain form the main control 
center of the body. The brain and spinal cord together form the central 
nervous system (CNS), where information is processed and responses 
originate. The brain, the seat of higher mental functions such as 
consciousness, memory, planning, and voluntary actions, also controls lower 
body functions such as the maintenance of respiration, heart rate, blood 
pressure, and digestion.  
The brain lies within the skull and is shaped like a mushroom.  The brain 
consists of four principal parts: 
 the brain stem 
 the cerebrum 
 the cerebellum 
 the diencephalon 
The brain weighs approximately 1.3 to 1.4 kg. It has nerve cells called the 
neurons and supporting cells called the glia. 
There are two types of matter in the brain:  grey matter and white 
matter.  Grey matter receives and stores impulses.  Cell bodies of neurons 
and neuroglia are in the grey matter.  White matter in the brain carries 
impulses to and from grey matter.  It consists of the nerve fibers (axons). 
The brain stem 
The brain stem is also known as the Medulla oblongata. It is located between 
the pons and the spinal cord and is only about one inch long. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 294 
 
The cerebrum 
The cerebrum forms the bulk of the brain and is supported on the brain 
stem.  The cerebrum is divided into two hemispheres.  Each hemisphere 
controls the activities of the side of the body opposite that hemisphere.  
The hemispheres are further divided into four lobes: 
 Frontal lobe 
 Temporal lobes 
 Parietal lobe 
 Occipital lobe 
The cerebellum 
This is located behind and below the cerebrum.  
The diencephalon 
The diencephalon is also known as the fore brain stem. It includes the 
thalamus and hypothalamus. The thalamus is where sensory and other 
impulses go and coalesce. 
The hypothalamus is a smaller part of the diencephalon 
Other parts of the brain 
Other parts of the brain include the midbrain and the pons: 
 the midbrain provides conduction pathways to and from higher and 
lower centers 
 the pons acts as a pathway to higher structures;  it contains conduction 
pathways between the medulla and higher brain centers 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 295 
 
 
 
Spinal Cord 
 
The spinal cord is a long, thin mass of bundled neurons that carries 
information through the vertebral cavity of the spine beginning at 
the medulla oblongata of the brain on its superior end and continuing 
inferiorly to the lumbar region of the spine. In the lumbar region, the spinal 
cord separates into a bundle of individual nerves called thecauda 
equina (due to its resemblance to a horse‘s tail) that continues inferiorly to 
thesacrum and coccyx. The white matter of the spinal cord functions as the 
main conduit of nerve signals to the body from the brain. The grey matter of 
the spinal cord integrates reflexes to stimuli. 
 
Nerves 
Nerves are bundles of axons in the peripheral nervous system (PNS) that act 
as information highways to carry signals between the brain and spinal cord 
and the rest of the body. Each axon is wrapped in a connective tissue sheath 
called the endoneurium. Individual axons of the nerve are bundled into 
groups of axons called fascicles, wrapped in a sheath of connective tissue 
called the perineurium. Finally, many fascicles are wrapped together in 
another layer of connective tissue called the epineurium to form a whole 
nerve. The wrapping of nerves with connective tissue helps to protect the 
axons and to increase the speed of their communication within the body. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 296 
 
 Afferent, Efferent, and Mixed Nerves. Some of the nerves in the body are 
specialized for carrying information in only one direction, similar to a one-
way street. Nerves that carry information from sensory receptors to the 
central nervous system only are called afferent nerves. Other neurons, 
known as efferent nerves, carry signals only from the central nervous system 
to effectors such as muscles and glands. Finally, some nerves are mixed 
nerves that contain both afferent and efferent axons. Mixed nerves function 
like 2-way streets where afferent axons act as lanes heading toward the 
central nervous system and efferent axons act as lanes heading away from 
the central nervous system. 
 
  
 Cranial Nerves. Extending from the inferior side of the brain are 12 pairs of 
cranial nerves. Each cranial nerve pair is identified by a Roman numeral 1 to 
12 based upon its location along the anterior-posterior axis of the brain. Each 
nerve also has a descriptive name (e.g. olfactory, optic, etc.) that identifies 
its function or location. The cranial nerves provide a direct connection to the 
brain for the special sense organs, muscles of the head, neck, and shoulders, 
the heart, and the GI tract. 
 
  
 
 Spinal Nerves. Extending from the left and right sides of the spinal cord are 
31 pairs of spinal nerves. The spinal nerves are mixed nerves that carry both 
sensory and motor signals between the spinal cord and specific regions of 
the body. The 31 spinal nerves are split into 5 groups named for the 5 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 297 
 
regions of the vertebral column. Thus, there are 8 pairs of cervical nerves, 12 
pairs of thoracic nerves, 5 pairs oflumbar nerves, 5 pairs of sacral nerves, 
and 1 pair of coccygeal nerves. Each spinal nerve exits from the spinal cord 
through the intervertebral foramen between a pair of vertebrae or between 
the C1 vertebra and the occipital bone of the skull. 
 
Meninges 
 
The meninges are the protective coverings of the central nervous system 
(CNS). They consist of three layers: the dura mater, arachnoid mater, and pia 
mater 
. 
 Dura mater. The dura mater, which means ―tough mother,‖ is the thickest, 
toughest, and most superficial layer of meninges. Made of dense irregular 
connective tissue, it contains many tough collagen fibers and blood vessels. 
Dura mater protects the CNS from external damage, contains the 
cerebrospinal fluid that surrounds the CNS, and provides blood to the 
nervous 
tissue 
of 
the 
CNS. 
  
 Arachnoid mater. The arachnoid mater, which means ―spider-like 
mother,‖ is much thinner and more delicate than the dura mater. It lines the 
inside of the dura mater and contains many thin fibers that connect it to the 
underlying pia mater. These fibers cross a fluid-filled space called the 
subarachnoid space between the arachnoid mater and the pia mater. 
 
  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 298 
 
 Pia mater. The pia mater, which means ―tender mother,‖ is a thin and 
delicate layer of tissue that rests on the outside of the brain and spinal cord. 
Containing many blood vessels that feed the nervous tissue of the CNS, the 
pia mater penetrates into the valleys of the sulci and fissures of the brain as it 
covers the entire surface of the CNS. 
 
Cerebrospinal Fluid 
 
The space surrounding the organs of the CNS is filled with a clear fluid 
known as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). CSF is formed from blood plasma by 
special structures called choroid plexuses. The choroid plexuses contain 
many capillaries lined with epithelial tissue that filters blood plasma and 
allows the filtered fluid to enter the space around the brain.   
Newly created CSF flows through the inside of the brain in hollow spaces 
called ventricles and through a small cavity in the middle of the spinal cord 
called the central canal. CSF also flows through the subarachnoid space 
around the outside of the brain and spinal cord. CSF is constantly produced 
at the choroid plexuses and is reabsorbed into the bloodstream at structures 
called arachnoid villi. 
Cerebrospinal fluid provides several vital functions to the central 
nervous system: 
1. CSF absorbs shocks between the brain and skull and between the spinal cord 
and vertebrae. This shock absorption protects the CNS from blows or sudden 
changes 
in 
velocity, 
such 
as 
during 
a 
car 
accident. 
  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 299 
 
2. The brain and spinal cord float within the CSF, reducing their apparent 
weight through buoyancy. The brain is a very large but soft organ that 
requires a high volume of blood to function effectively. The reduced weight 
in cerebrospinal fluid allows the blood vessels of the brain to remain open 
and helps protect the nervous tissue from becoming crushed under its own 
weight. 
 
  
3. CSF helps to maintain chemical homeostasis within the central nervous 
system. It contains ions, nutrients, oxygen, and albumins that support the 
chemical and osmotic balance of nervous tissue. CSF also removes waste 
products that form as byproducts of cellular metabolism within nervous 
tissue. 
 
Sense Organs 
 
All of the bodies‘ many sense organs are components of the nervous system. 
What are known as the special senses—vision, taste, smell, hearing, and 
balance—are all detected by specialized organs such as the eyes, taste buds, 
and olfactory epithelium. Sensory receptors for the general senses like touch, 
temperature, and pain are found throughout most of the body. All of the 
sensory receptors of the body are connected to afferent neurons that carry 
their sensory information to the CNS to be processed and integrated. 
 
Functions of the Nervous System 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 300 
 
 
The nervous system has 3 main functions: sensory, integration, and motor.    
 Sensory. The sensory function of the nervous system involves collecting 
information from sensory receptors that monitor the body‘s internal and 
external conditions. These signals are then passed on to the central nervous 
system (CNS) for further processing by afferent neurons (and nerves). 
 
  
 Integration. The process of integration is the processing of the many 
sensory signals that are passed into the CNS at any given time. These signals 
are evaluated, compared, used for decision making, discarded or committed 
to memory as deemed appropriate. Integration takes place in the gray matter 
of the brain and spinal cord and is performed by interneurons. Many 
interneurons work together to form complex networks that provide this 
processing power. 
 
  
 Motor. Once the networks of interneurons in the CNS evaluate sensory 
information and decide on an action, they stimulate efferent neurons. 
Efferent neurons (also called motor neurons) carry signals from the gray 
matter of the CNS through the nerves of the peripheral nervous system to 
effector cells. The effector may be smooth, cardiac, or skeletal muscle tissue 
or glandular tissue. The effector then releases a hormone or moves a part of 
the body to respond to the stimulus. 
 
Divisions of the Nervous System 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 301 
 
 
Central Nervous System 
 
The brain and spinal cord together form the central nervous system, or CNS. 
The CNS acts as the control center of the body by providing its processing, 
memory, and regulation systems. The CNS takes in all of the conscious and 
subconscious sensory information from the body‘s sensory receptors to stay 
aware of the body‘s internal and external conditions. Using this sensory 
information, it makes decisions about both conscious and subconscious 
actions to take to maintain the body‘s homeostasis and ensure its survival. 
The CNS is also responsible for the higher functions of the nervous system 
such as language, creativity, expression, emotions, and personality. The 
brain is the seat of consciousness and determines who we are as individuals. 
 
Peripheral Nervous System 
 
The peripheral nervous system (PNS) includes all of the parts of the nervous 
system outside of the brain and spinal cord. These parts include all of the 
cranial and spinal nerves, ganglia, and sensory receptors. 
 
Somatic Nervous System 
 
The somatic nervous system (SNS) is a division of the PNS that includes all 
of the voluntary efferent neurons. The SNS is the only consciously 
controlled part of the PNS and is responsible for stimulating skeletal muscles 
in the body. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 302 
 
 
Autonomic Nervous System 
 
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is a division of the PNS that includes 
all of the involuntary efferent neurons. The ANS controls subconscious 
effectors such as visceral muscle tissue, cardiac muscle tissue, and glandular 
tissue. 
There are 2 divisions of the autonomic nervous system in the body: the 
sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions. 
 Sympathetic. The sympathetic division forms the body‘s ―fight or flight‖ 
response 
to 
stress, 
danger, 
excitement, 
exercise, 
emotions, 
and 
embarrassment. The sympathetic division increases respiration and heart 
rate, releases adrenaline and other stress hormones, and decreases digestion 
to cope with these situations. 
 
  
 Parasympathetic. The parasympathetic division forms the body‘s ―rest and 
digest‖ response when the body is relaxed, resting, or feeding. The 
parasympathetic works to undo the work of the sympathetic division after a 
stressful situation. Among other functions, the parasympathetic division 
works to decrease respiration and heart rate, increase digestion, and permit 
the elimination of wastes. 
 
Enteric Nervous System 
 
The enteric nervous system (ENS) is the division of the ANS that is 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 303 
 
responsible for regulating digestion and the function of the digestive organs. 
The ENS receives signals from the central nervous system through both the 
sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the autonomic nervous system 
to help regulate its functions. However, the ENS mostly works 
independently of the CNS and continues to function without any outside 
input. For this reason, the ENS is often called the ―brain of the gut‖ or the 
body‘s ―second brain.‖ The ENS is an immense system—almost as many 
neurons exist in the ENS as in the spinal cord. 
Action Potentials 
 
Neurons function through the generation and propagation of electrochemical 
signals known as action potentials (APs). An AP is created by the movement 
of sodium and potassium ions through the membrane of neurons.  
 Resting Potential. At rest, neurons maintain a concentration of sodium ions 
outside of the cell and potassium ions inside of the cell. This concentration is 
maintained by the sodium-potassium pump of the cell membrane which 
pumps 3 sodium ions out of the cell for every 2 potassium ions that are 
pumped into the cell. The ion concentration results in a resting electrical 
potential of -70 millivolts (mV), which means that the inside of the cell has a 
negative charge compared to its surroundings. 
 Threshold Potential. If a stimulus permits enough positive ions to enter a 
region of the cell to cause it to reach -55 mV, that region of the cell will 
open its voltage-gated sodium channels and allow sodium ions to diffuse 
into the cell. -55 mV is the threshold potential for neurons as this is the 
―trigger‖ voltage that they must reach to cross the threshold into forming an 
action potential. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 304 
 
 Depolarization. Sodium carries a positive charge that causes the cell to 
become depolarized (positively charged) compared to its normal negative 
charge. The voltage for depolarization of all neurons is +30 mV. The 
depolarization of the cell is the AP that is transmitted by the neuron as a 
nerve signal. The positive ions spread into neighboring regions of the cell, 
initiating a new AP in those regions as they reach -55 mV. The AP continues 
to spread down the cell membrane of the neuron until it reaches the end of 
an axon. 
 Repolarization. After the depolarization voltage of +30 mV is reached, 
voltage-gated potassium ion channels open, allowing positive potassium ions 
to diffuse out of the cell. The loss of potassium along with the pumping of 
sodium ions back out of the cell through the sodium-potassium pump 
restores the cell to the -55 mV resting potential. At this point the neuron is 
ready to start a new action potential. 
 
Synapses 
A synapse is the junction between a neuron and another cell. Synapses may 
form between 2 neurons or between a neuron and an effector cell. There are 
two types of synapses found in the body: chemical synapses and electrical 
synapses. 
 Chemical synapses. At the end of a neuron‘s axon is an enlarged region of 
the axon known as the axon terminal. The axon terminal is separated from 
the next cell by a small gap known as the synaptic cleft. When an AP 
reaches the axon terminal, it opens voltage-gated calcium ion channels. 
Calcium 
ions 
cause 
vesicles 
containing 
chemicals 
known 
as 
neurotransmitters (NT) to release their contents by exocytosis into the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 305 
 
synaptic cleft. The NT molecules cross the synaptic cleft and bind to 
receptor molecules on the cell, forming a synapse with the neuron. These 
receptor molecules open ion channels that may either stimulate the receptor 
cell to form a new action potential or may inhibit the cell from forming an 
action potential when stimulated by another neuron. 
 Electrical synapses. Electrical synapses are formed when 2 neurons are 
connected by small holes called gap junctions. The gap junctions allow 
electric current to pass from one neuron to the other, so that an AP in one 
cell is passed directly on to the other cell through the synapse. 
 
Myelination 
The axons of many neurons are covered by a coating of insulation known as 
myelin to increase the speed of nerve conduction throughout the body. 
Myelin is formed by 2 types of glial cells: Schwann cells in the PNS and 
oligodendrocytes in the CNS. In both cases, the glial cells wrap their plasma 
membrane around the axon many times to form a thick covering of lipids. 
The development of these myelin sheaths is known as myelination. 
Myelination speeds up the movement of APs in the axon by reducing the 
number of APs that must form for a signal to reach the end of an axon. The 
myelination process begins speeding up nerve conduction in fetal 
development and continues into early adulthood. Myelinated axons appear 
white due to the presence of lipids and form the white matter of the inner 
brain and outer spinal cord. White matter is specialized for carrying 
information quickly through the brain and spinal cord. The gray matter of 
the brain and spinal cord are the unmyelinated integration centers where 
information is processed. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 306 
 
Reflexes 
Reflexes are fast, involuntary responses to stimuli. The most well known 
reflex is the patellar reflex, which is checked when a physicians taps on a 
patient‘s knee during a physical examination. Reflexes are integrated in the 
gray matter of the spinal cord or in the brain stem. Reflexes allow the body 
to respond to stimuli very quickly by sending responses to effectors before 
the nerve signals reach the conscious parts of the brain. This explains why 
people will often pull their hands away from a hot object before they realize 
they are in pain. 
 
Functions of the Cranial Nerves 
 
Each of the 12 cranial nerves has a specific function within the nervous 
system. 
 The olfactory nerve (I) carries scent information to the brain from the 
olfactory epithelium in the roof of the nasal cavity.  
 The optic nerve (II) carries visual information from the eyes to the brain.  
 Oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerves (III, IV, and VI) all work 
together to allow the brain to control the movement and focus of the eyes. 
The trigeminal nerve (V) carries sensations from the face and innervates 
the muscles of mastication.  
 The facial nerve (VII) innervates the muscles of the face to make facial 
expressions and carries taste information from the anterior 2/3 of the 
tongue.  
 The vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII) conducts auditory and balance 
information from the ears to the brain.  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 307 
 
 The glossopharyngeal nerve (IX) carries taste information from the posterior 
1/3 of the tongue and assists in swallowing.  
 The vagus nerve (X), sometimes called the wandering nerve due to the fact 
that it innervates many different areas, ―wanders‖ through the head, neck, 
and torso. It carries information about the condition of the vital organs to the 
brain, delivers motor signals to control speech and delivers parasympathetic 
signals to many organs. 
 The accessory nerve (XI) controls the movements of the shoulders and 
neck.  
 The hypoglossal nerve (XII) moves the tongue for speech and swallowing. 
 
Sensory Physiology 
 
All sensory receptors can be classified by their structure and by the type of 
stimulus that they detect. Structurally, there are 3 classes of sensory 
receptors: free nerve endings, encapsulated nerve endings, and specialized 
cells. Free nerve endings are simply free dendrites at the end of a neuron that 
extend into a tissue. Pain, heat, and cold are all sensed through free nerve 
endings. An encapsulated nerve ending is a free nerve ending wrapped in a 
round capsule of connective tissue. When the capsule is deformed by touch 
or pressure, the neuron is stimulated to send signals to the CNS. Specialized 
cells detect stimuli from the 5 special senses: vision, hearing, balance, smell, 
and taste. Each of the special senses has its own unique sensory cells—such 
as rods and cones in the retina to detect light for the sense of vision. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 308 
 
Functionally, there are 6 major classes of receptors: mechanoreceptors, 
nociceptors, 
photoreceptors, 
chemoreceptors, 
osmoreceptors, 
and 
thermoreceptors.   
 Mechanoreceptors. Mechanoreceptors are sensitive to mechanical stimuli 
like touch, pressure, vibration, and blood pressure. 
 
 Nociceptors. Nociceptors respond to stimuli such as extreme heat, cold, or 
tissue damage by sending pain signals to the CNS.  
  
 Photoreceptors. Photoreceptors in the retina detect light to provide the sense 
of 
vision. 
  
 Chemoreceptors. Chemoreceptors detect chemicals in the bloodstream and 
provide the senses of taste and smell. 
 Osmoreceptors. Osmoreceptors monitor the osmolarity of the blood to 
determine 
the 
body's 
hydration 
levels. 
  
 Thermoreceptors. Thermoreceptors detect temperatures inside the body and 
in its surroundings. 
 
 
The Nervous System and Reflexes 
In general, nerve function is dependent on both sensory and motor fibers, 
sensory stimulation evoking motor response. Even the autonomic system is 
activated by sensory impulses from receptors in the organ or muscle. Where 
especially sensitive areas or powerful stimuli are concerned, it is not always 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 309 
 
necessary for a sensory impulse to reach the brain in order to trigger motor 
response. A sensory neuron may link directly to a motor neuron at a synapse 
in the spinal cord, forming a reflex arc that performs automatically. Thus, 
tapping the tendon below the kneecap causes the leg to jerk involuntarily 
because the impulse provoked by the tap, after traveling to the spinal cord, 
travels directly back to the leg muscle. Such a response is called an 
involuntary reflex action. 
Commonly, the reflex arc includes one or more connector neurons that exert 
a modulating effect, allowing varying degrees of response, e.g., according to 
whether the stimulation is strong, weak, or prolonged. Reflex arcs are often 
linked with other arcs by nerve fibers in the spinal cord. Consequently, a 
number of reflex muscle responses may be triggered simultaneously, as 
when a person shudders and jerks away from the touch of an insect. Links 
between the reflex arcs and higher centers enable the brain to identify a 
sensory stimulus, such as pain; to note the reflex response, such as 
withdrawal; and to inhibit that response, as when the arm is held steady 
against the prick of a hypodermic needle. 
Reflex patterns are inherited rather than learned, having evolved as 
involuntary survival mechanisms. But voluntary actions initiated in the brain 
may become reflex actions through continued association of a particular 
stimulus with a certain result. In such cases, an alteration of impulse routes 
occurs that permits responses without mediation by higher nerve centers. 
Such responses are called conditioned reflexes, the most famous example 
being one of the experiments Ivan Pavlov performed with dogs. After the 
dogs had learned to associate the provision of food with the sound of a bell, 
they salivated at the sound of the bell even when food was not offered. Habit 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 310 
 
formation and much of learning are dependent on conditioned reflexes. To 
illustrate, the brain of a student typist must coordinate sensory impulses 
from both the eyes and the muscles in order to direct the fingers to particular 
keys. After enough repetition the fingers automatically find and strike the 
proper keys even if the eyes are closed. The student has "learned" to type; 
that is, typing has become a conditioned reflex. 
 
 
Disorders of the Nervous System 
A number of diseases can significantly affect the proper functioning of the 
nervous system. Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, myasthenia 
gravis, andamyotrophic lateral sclerosis (commonly known as Lou Gehrig's 
disease) are some of the more severe diseases affecting the nervous system. 
Strokes, which are related to circulatory disorders, also may have permanent 
effects on the nervous system. Certain plant derivatives, such 
as belladonna, cocaine, and caffeine, have a variety of stimulatory, 
inhibitory, and hallucinatory effects on the nervous system. 
 
Sense organs 
Aristotle (384 BC - 322 BC) is credited with the traditional classification of 
the five sense organs: sight, smell, taste, touch, and hearing. As far back as 
the 1760's, the famous philosopher Immanuel Kant proposed that our 
knowledge of the outside world depends on our modes of perception. In 
order to define what is "extrasensory" we need to define what is "sensory". 
Each of the 5 senses consists of organs with specialized cellular structures 
that have receptors for specific stimuli. These cells have links to the nervous 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 311 
 
system and thus to the brain. Sensing is done at primitive levels in the cells 
and integrated into sensations in the nervous system. Sight is probably the 
most developed sense in humans, followed closely by hearing. 
An organ of the body which responds to external stimuli by conveying 
impulses to the sensory nervous system. The sense organs — eyes, ears, 
tongue, skin, and nose — help to protect the body. The human sense organs 
contain receptors that relay information through sensory neurons to the 
appropriate places within the nervous system. 
Each sense organ contains different receptors. 
 General receptors are found throughout the body because they are 
present in skin, visceral organs (visceral meaning in the abdominal 
cavity), muscles, and joints. 
 Special receptors include chemoreceptors (chemical receptors) found in 
the mouth and nose, photoreceptors (light receptors) found in the eyes, 
and mechanoreceptors found in the ears. 
There are five senses: sight, hearing, taste, smell and touch. There are organs 
connected with these sense that take in information that is sent to the brain 
so that the body can act on it. 
We use senses to gauge or understand the environment around us. In order 
for us to use our senses, we needstimuli. Stimuli are signals. These signals 
are gathered by receptors, and then neurons transmit the signal to the brain 
for interpretation. Your brain interprets the stimuli and responds 
accordingly. Sometimes, in response to stimuli, the brain will send back a 
signal for you to move your hand if something is too hot; or maybe the brain 
will tell you to continue to feel an object to get more information. Each of 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 312 
 
the senses has different receptors that gather stimuli before sending it to the 
neurons for transmission to the brain. 
You can think of the process of stimuli getting to the brain as a relay race. 
The receptors are the first person in a relay race, and the stimuli is the baton 
that gets passed along. Neurons are the second person in the replay race, and 
receptors pass the baton or the stimuli to the neurons. Lastly, the neurons 
pass the stimuli to the brain for interpretation. 
 
The five senses are the five main tools that humans use to perceive the 
world. Those senses are sight, smell, hearing, taste, and touch. We see with 
our eyes, we smell with our noses, we listen with our ears, we taste with our 
tongue, and we touch with our skin. Our brain receives signals from each of 
these organs, and interprets them to give us a sense of what's happening 
around us. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 313 
 
 
The Five Senses 
Neurologists might argue that in reality there are far more than five senses - 
anywhere from 9 to 21. These include things like perception of heat, 
pressure, pain, and balance, among others. 
But the five basic senses are still useful to know and far easier to remember. 
They're vitally important to how our bodies operate. Without our senses, we 
wouldn't have any idea what was going on around us and the human body 
would be functionally useless. Each of the senses therefore provides 
important functions and serves a particular intended purpose. Let's talk about 
some of those functions. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 314 
 
What Are the Functions of the Five Senses? 
Eyes obviously allow us to see. But if you break it down, they do a more 
than just that. Using our eyes, we can judge depth, interpret new 
information, and identify color (the wavelengths of light that reflect off 
surfaces). 
 
Seeing is believing: Sight 
The eye is the organ of vision. It has a complex structure consisting of a 
transparent lens that focuses light on the retina. The retina is covered with 
two basic types of light-sensitive cells-rods and cones. The cone cells are 
sensitive to color and are located in the part of the retina called the fovea, 
where the light is focused by the lens. The rod cells are not sensitive to 
color, but have greater sensitivity to light than the cone cells. These cells are 
located around the fovea and are responsible for peripheral vision and night 
vision. The eye is connected to the brain through the optic nerve. The point 
of this connection is called the "blind spot" because it is insensitive to light. 
Experiments have shown that the back of the brain maps the visual input 
from the eyes. 
The brain combines the input of our two eyes into a single three-dimensional 
image. In addition, even though the image on the retina is upside-down 
because of the focusing action of the lens, the brain compensates and 
provides the right-side-up perception. Experiments have been done with 
subjects fitted with prisms that invert the images. The subjects go through an 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 315 
 
initial period of great confusion, but subsequently they perceive the images 
as right side up. 
The range of perception of the eye is phenomenal. In the dark, a substance 
produced by the rod cells increases the sensitivity of the eye so that it is 
possible to detect very dim light. In strong light, the iris contracts reducing 
the size of the aperture that admits light into the eye and a protective obscure 
substance reduces the exposure of the light-sensitive cells. The spectrum of 
light to which the eye is sensitive varies from the red to the violet. Lower 
electromagnetic frequencies in the infrared are sensed as heat, but cannot be 
seen. Higher frequencies in the ultraviolet and beyond cannot be seen either, 
but can be sensed as tingling of the skin or eyes depending on the frequency. 
The human eye is not sensitive to the polarization of light, i.e., light that 
oscillates on a specific plane. Bees, on the other hand, are sensitive to 
polarized light, and have a visual range that extends into the ultraviolet. 
Some kinds of snakes have special infrared sensors that enable them to hunt 
in absolute darkness using only the heat emitted by their prey. Birds have a 
higher density of light-sensing cells than humans do in their retinas, and 
therefore, higher visual acuity. Color blindness or "Daltonism" is a common 
abnormality in human vision that makes it impossible to differentiate colors 
accurately. One type of color blindness results in the inability to distinguish 
red from green. This can be a real handicap for certain types of occupations. 
To a colorblind person, a person with normal color vision would appear to 
have extrasensory perception. However, we want to reserve the term 
"extrasensory perception" for perception that is beyond the range of the 
normal. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 316 
 
When you look at an eye, the iris is the colored part. The iris actually is a 
pigmented muscle that controls the size of the pupil, which dilates to allow 
more light into the eye or contracts to allow less light into the eye. The iris 
and pupil are covered by the cornea. 
Behind the pupil is an anterior chamber. Behind the anterior chamber is 
thelens. The ciliary body contains a small muscle that connects to the lens 
and the iris. The ciliary muscle changes the shape of the lens to adjust for far 
or near vision. The lens flattens to see farther away, and it becomes rounded 
for near vision. The process of changing the shape of the lens is called 
accommodation. People lose the ability of accommodation as they grow 
older, prompting the need for glasses. 
Behind the lens of the eye is the vitreous body, which is filled with a 
gelatinous material called vitreous humor. This substance gives shape to the 
eyeball and also transmits light to the very back of the eyeball, where 
the retina lies. The retina contains photoreceptors, which detect light. 
Two types of sensors detect light: 
 Rods detect motion. The rods work harder in low light. 
 Cones detect fine detail and color. The cones work best in bright light. 
There are three types of cones: one that detects blue, one that detects 
red, and one that detects green. Color blindness occurs when one type of 
cone is lacking. 
When light strikes the rods and cones, nerve impulses are generated. The 
impulse travels to two types of neurons: first to bipolar cells and then to 
ganglionic cells. The axons of ganglionic cells form the optic nerve. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 317 
 
The optic nerve carries the impulse directly to the brain. Approximately 150 
million rods are in a retina, but only 1 million ganglionic cells and nerve 
fibers are there, which means that many more rods can be stimulated than 
there are cells and nerve fibers to carry the impulses. Your eye must 
combine ―messages‖ before the impulses are sent to the brain. 
The eye is the organ of the sense of sight. Eyes detect light, and convert it to 
electro-chemical impulses in neurons. 
Parts of the eye: 
 The transparent window at the front of the eye which is covered in a thin 
layer of tears. 
Aqueous humor On the other side of the cornea is more moisture. This 
clear, watery fluid is the aqueous humor. It circulates throughout the front 
part of the eye and keeps a constant pressure within the eye. 
Pupil and iris:The pupil is the circular opening in the colored part of the eye 
which is the iris. The iris dilates or opens and contracts to let in more or less 
light. 
Lens:Resembles the lens of a camera and focuses the light, changing shape 
as it takes in light reflected from objects near and far. 
Vitreous:A clear jelly that the focused light passes through to the retina. 
Retina:The inner lining at the back of the eye. It contains blood vessels 
which bring nutrients to the nerve cells. The macula is at the very center of 
the retina and contains the fovea. The photoreceptors of the retina are the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 318 
 
rods and cones. The cones perceive color and finer elements. The retinal 
pigment epithelium, choroid and sclera are three more layers. The 
photoreceptors send light and images to a large nerve called the optic nerve. 
This carries the information to the occipital lobe of the brain where they are 
interpreted. 
Eyelids and eyelashes:These protect the eye and along with tears keep the 
eye clear and moist. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 319 
 
 
Now hear this: Sound 
The ear is the organ of hearing. The outer ear protrudes away from the head 
and is shaped like a cup to direct sounds toward the tympanic membrane, 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 320 
 
which transmits vibrations to the inner ear through a series of small bones in 
the middle ear called the malleus, incus and stapes. The inner ear, or 
cochlea, is a spiral-shaped chamber covered internally by nerve fibers that 
react to the vibrations and transmit impulses to the brain via the auditory 
nerve. The brain combines the input of our two ears to determine the 
direction and distance of sounds. 
The inner ear has a vestibular system formed by three semicircular canals 
that are approximately at right angles to each other and which are 
responsible for the sense of balance and spatial orientation. The inner ear has 
chambers filled with a viscous fluid and small particles (otoliths) containing 
calcium carbonate. The movement of these particles over small hair cells in 
the inner ear sends signals to the brain that are interpreted as motion and 
acceleration. 
The human ear can perceive frequencies from 16 cycles per second, which is 
a very deep bass, to 28,000 cycles per second, which is a very high pitch. 
Bats and dolphins can detect frequencies higher than 100,000 cycles per 
second. The human ear can detect pitch changes as small as 3 hundredths of 
one percent of the original frequency in some frequency ranges. Some 
people have "perfect pitch", which is the ability to map a tone precisely on 
the musical scale without reference to an external standard. It is estimated 
that less than one in ten thousand people have perfect pitch, but speakers of 
tonal languages like Vietnamese and Mandarin show remarkably precise 
absolute pitch in reading out lists of words because pitch is an essential 
feature in conveying the meaning of words in tone languages. The Eguchi 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 321 
 
Method teaches perfect pitch to children starting before they are 4 years old. 
After age 7, the ability to recognize notes does not improve much. 
The ear not only is the organ of hearing, but it also is responsible for 
maintaining equilibrium — or balance. To maintain equilibrium, the ear 
must detect movement. To hear, the ear must respond to mechanical 
stimulation by sound waves. 
The outer ear is the external opening to the ear canal. Sound waves are 
shuttled through the ear canal to the middle ear. The eardrum sets the 
mechanics in motion: 
1. When a sound wave hits the eardrum, the eardrum moves tiny bones — 
the malleus, incus, and stapes — which subsequently move. 
2. This movement is picked up by the mechanoreceptors in the inner ear, 
which exist on hair cells containing cilia between the end of the 
semicircular canals and the vestibule. 
3. When the cilia move, the cells create an impulse that is sent through the 
cochlea to the eighth cranial nerve, which carries the impulse to the 
brain. 
4. The brain then interprets the information as a specific sound. 
The fluid within the semicircular canals of the inner ear moves, and that 
movement is ultimately detected by the cilia. When the fluid doesn‘t stop 
moving, you can develop motion sickness. The cilia transmit impulses to the 
brain about angular and rotational movement, as well as movement through 
vertical and horizontal planes, which helps your body to keep its 
balance.The ear is the organ concerned with hearing. The ear has three parts: 
the outer ear, the middle ear and the inner ear. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 322 
 
Outer ear: Pinna:  The outermost part of the ear made of cartilage that is 
connected to the outer tube called the auditory canal. This leads to the 
eardrum. 
 Middle Ear Eardrum, stirrup, anvil and hammer: This membrane 
vibrates and along with the three tiny bones in the middle ear, the hammer, 
anvil and stirrup, and sends the stiumuli to the cochlea. 
Inner Ear: Cochlea: Is spiral shaped and it transforms sound into nerve 
impulses that travel to the brain. 
Semicircular canals: These fluid filled tubes attach to the cochlea and 
nerves in the inner ear. They send information on balance and head position 
to the brain. 
Eustachian tube: Drains fluid from the middle ear into the throat behind the 
nose. 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 323 
 
 
 
Mmm, mmm, good: Taste 
Tongue: 
The receptors for taste, called taste buds, are situated chiefly in the tongue, 
but they are also located in the roof of the mouth and near the pharynx. They 
are able to detect four basic tastes: salty, sweet, bitter, and sour. The tongue 
also can detect a sensation called "umami" from taste receptors sensitive to 
amino acids. Generally, the taste buds close to the tip of the tongue are 
sensitive to sweet tastes, whereas those in the back of the tongue are 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 324 
 
sensitive to bitter tastes. The taste buds on top and on the side of the tongue 
are sensitive to salty and sour tastes. At the base of each taste bud there is a 
nerve that sends the sensations to the brain. The sense of taste functions in 
coordination with the sense of smell. The number of taste buds varies 
substantially from individual to individual, but greater numbers increase 
sensitivity. Women, in general, have a greater number of taste buds than 
men. As in the case of color blindness, some people are insensitive to some 
tastes. 
The senses of smell and taste work closely together. If you cannot smell 
something, you cannot taste it, either. Taste buds on your tongue contain 
chemoreceptors that work in a similar fashion to the chemoreceptors in the 
nasal cavity. However, the chemoreceptors in the nose will detect any kind 
of smell, whereas there are four different types of taste buds, and each 
detects different types of tastes: sweet, sour, bitter, and salty. 
 
A common misconception is that the little bumps on your tongue are the 
taste buds. As with all misconceptions, this idea is wrong, too. The little 
bumps on your tongue are called papillae, and the taste buds actually lie 
down in the grooves between each papilla. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 325 
 
Foods contain chemicals, and when you put something into your mouth, the 
taste buds in your tongue can detect what chemicals you are ingesting. Each 
taste bud has a pore at one end with microvilli sticking out of the pore, and 
sensory nerve fibers attached to the other end. Chemicals from food bind to 
the microvilli, generating a nerve impulse that is carried through the sensory 
nerve fibers and eventually to the brain. 
Is a muscular organ in the mouth. The tongue is covered with moist, pink 
tissue called mucosa and tiny bumps called papillae. Thousands of taste buds 
cover the surfaces of the papillae. Taste buds are collections of nerve-like 
cells that connect to nerves going into the brain. There are four types of taste 
buds: sour, sweet, bitter and salty. The tongue is vital in tasting and chewing 
food and in speech. 
 Oooh, that smell: Olfaction 
Nose: 
The nose is the organ responsible for the sense of smell. The cavity of the 
nose is lined with mucous membranes that have smell receptors connected to 
the olfactory nerve. The smells themselves consist of vapors of various 
substances. The smell receptors interact with the molecules of these vapors 
and transmit the sensations to the brain. The nose also has a structure called 
the vomeronasal organ whose function has not been determined, but which 
is suspected of being sensitive to pheromones that influence the reproductive 
cycle. The smell receptors are sensitive to seven types of sensations that can 
be characterized as camphor, musk, flower, mint, ether, acrid, or putrid. The 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 326 
 
sense of smell is sometimes temporarily lost when a person has a cold. Dogs 
have a sense of smell that is many times more sensitive than man's. 
The nose, along with the mouth, lets air in and out of the body. It also helops 
us distinguish different smells in that air. The nasal root is the top of the 
nose, forming an indentation at the suture where the nasal bones meet the 
frontal bone. The anterior nasal spine is the thin projection of bone at the 
midline on the lower nasal margin, holding the cartilaginous center of the 
nose.[1] Adult humans have nasal hairs in the anterior nasal passage. 
 
Olfactory cells line the top of your nasal cavity. On one end, olfactory cells 
have cilia — hair-like attachments — that project into the nasal cavity. On 
the other end of the cell, are olfactory nerve fibers, which pass through the 
ethmoid bone and into the olfactory bulb. The olfactory bulb is directly 
attached to the cerebral cortex of your brain. 
As you breathe, anything that is in the air that you take in enters your nasal 
cavity: hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, dust, pollen, chemicals. You don‘t 
―smell‖ air or dust or pollen, but you can smell chemicals. The olfactory 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 327 
 
cells are chemoreceptors, which means the olfactory cells have protein 
receptors that can detect subtle differences in chemicals. 
The chemicals bind to the cilia, which generate a nerve impulse that is 
carried through the olfactory cell, into the olfactory nerve fiber, up to the 
olfactory bulb and to your brain. Your brain determines what you are 
smelling. If you are sniffing something that you haven‘t experienced before, 
you need to use another sense, such as taste or sight, to make an imprint in 
your brain‘s memory. 
A touchy-feely subject: Touch 
The sense of touch is distributed throughout the body. Nerve endings in the 
skin and other parts of the body transmit sensations to the brain. Some parts 
of the body have a larger number of nerve endings and, therefore, are more 
sensitive. Four kinds of touch sensations can be identified: cold, heat, 
contact, and pain. Hairs on the skin magnify the sensitivity and act as an 
early warning system for the body. The fingertips and the sexual organs have 
the greatest concentration of nerve endings. The sexual organs have 
"erogenous zones" that when stimulated start a series of endocrine reactions 
and motor responses resulting in orgasm. 
The skin contains general receptors. These receptors can detect touch, pain, 
pressure, and temperature. Throughout your skin, you have all four of these 
receptors interspersed. Skin receptors generate an impulse when activated, 
which is carried to the spinal cord and then to the brain. 
The skin is not the only tissue in the body to have receptors, however. Your 
organs, which are made of tissues, also have receptors. Joints, ligaments, and 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 328 
 
tendons contain proprioceptors, which detect the position and movement of 
the limbs. 
Skin: The skin is the largest organ of the body, with a total area of about 20 
square feet. The skin protects us from microbes and the elements, helps 
regulate body temperature, and permits the sensations of touch, heat, and 
cold. The epidermis, the outermost layer of skin, provides a waterproof 
barrier and creates our skin tone. 
Layers: The dermis, beneath the epidermis, contains tough connective 
tissue, hair follicles, and sweat glands. 
 
The deeper subcutaneous tissue (hypodermis) is made of fat and connective 
tissue. 
The skin's color is created by special cells called melanocytes, which 
produce the pigment melanin. Melanocytes are located in the epidermis. 
  
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 329 
 
 
Beyond the five sense organs. 
In addition to sight, smell, taste, touch, and hearing, humans also have 
awareness 
of 
balance 
(equilibrioception), 
pressure, 
temperature 
(thermoception), pain (nociception), and motion all of which may involve 
the coordinated use of multiple sensory organs. The sense of balance is 
maintained by a complex interaction of visual inputs, the proprioceptive 
sensors (which are affected by gravity and stretch sensors found in muscles, 
skin, and joints), the inner ear vestibular system, and the central nervous 
system. Disturbances occurring in any part of the balance system, or even 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 330 
 
within the brain's integration of inputs, can cause the feeling of dizziness or 
unsteadiness. 
Kinesthesia is the precise awareness of muscle and joint movement that 
allows us to coordinate our muscles when we walk, talk, and use our hands. 
It is the sense of kinesthesia that enables us to touch the tip of our nose with 
our eyes closed or to know which part of the body we should scratch when 
we itch. 
Synesthesia. 
Some people experience a phenomenon called synesthesia in which one type 
of stimulation evokes the sensation of another. For example, the hearing of a 
sound may result in the sensation of the visualization of a color, or a shape 
may be sensed as a smell. Synesthesia is hereditary and it is estimated that it 
occurs in 1 out of 1000 individuals with variations of type and intensity. The 
most common forms of synesthesia link numbers or letters with colors. 
 
Definition of physiology:    A branch of biology that deals with the 
functions and activities of life or of living matter (as organs, 
tissues, or cells) and of the physical and chemical phenomena 
involved. 
 
The organic processes and phenomena of an organism or any of 
its parts or of a particular bodily process 
 
The scientific study of an organism's vital functions, including growth andde
velopment, the absorption and processing of nutrients, the synthesis anddistri

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 331 
 
bution of proteins and other organic molecules, and the functioning ofdiffere
nt tissues, organs, and other anatomic structures. 
 A physiology Studies the normal mechanical, physical, and biochemical 
process of animal‘s and plants. 
Physiology is the science of life. The discipline considers how molecules in 
cells interact to provide specific functions (molecular and cellular 
physiology) and how organs, which are collections of cell types, have local 
and distal actions via neural and humoral (e.g. hormones) communication to 
sustain the life of the organism. The latter represents systems or integrative 
physiology. Thus physiology is all about what makes our bodies work – how 
the organs – including the brain – function, how we grow and develop, how 
we sustain our bodily functions and what happens to these processes during 
disease and ageing. You can think of physiology as the functional side of 
biology – with the challenges and rewards of investigating living processes. 
Physiology contributes to all major aspects of biology, including 
comparative biology, neuroscience, and the allied disciplines of 
pharmacology, anatomy and pathology. 
Physiological studies date back to ancient civilizations of India, Egypt 
alongside anatomical studies but did not utilize dissections and 
vivisection. The study of human physiology as a medical field dates back to 
at least 420 BC to the time of Hippocrates, also known as the "father of 
medicine." Hippocrates incorporated his belief system called the theory of 
humours, which consisted of four basic substances: earth, water, air and fire. 
Each substance is known for having a corresponding humour: black bile, 
phlegm, blood and yellow bile, respectively. Hippocrates also noted some 
emotional connections to the four humours, which Claudis Galenus would 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 332 
 
later expand on. The critical thinking of Aristotle and his emphasis on the 
relationship between structure and function marked the beginning of 
physiology in Ancient Greece. Like Hippocrates, Aristotle took to the 
humeral theory of disease, which also consisted of four primary qualities in 
life: hot, cold, wet and dry. Claudius Galenus (c. ~130–200 AD), known as 
Galen of Pergamum, was the first to use experiments to probe the functions 
of the body. Unlike Hippocrates though, Galen argued that humeral 
imbalances can be located in specific organs, including the entire body. His 
modification of this theory better equipped doctors to make more precise 
diagnoses. Galen also played off of Hippocrates idea that emotions were also 
tied to the humors, and added the notion of temperaments: sanguine 
corresponds with blood; phlegmatic is tied to phlegm; yellow bile is 
connected to choleric; and black bile corresponds with melancholy. Galen 
also saw the human body consisting of three connected systems: the brain 
and nerves, which are responsible for thoughts and sensations; the heart and 
arteries, which give life; and the liver and veins, which can be attributed to 
nutrition and growth.[10] To top it off, Galen was also the founder of 
experimental physiology. And for the next 1,400 years, Galenic physiology 
was a powerful and influential tool in medicine. 
Physiology is the study of how molecules, cells and organs interact to form a 
whole being. The work of Physiological Society Members, advancing our 
knowledge of biological systems, is essential to the development of new 
treatments for disease. Since The Society's foundation in 1876, our 
membership has included more than 20 Nobel Prize winners from Ivan 
Pavlov to Andrew Huxley. The scientists who make up The Society have 
made many key discoveries, ranging from how our nervous system 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 333 
 
works, how our cells divide and the way in which our reflexes alter our 
behaviour. These have advanced our knowledge of biological systems and 
helped in the treatment of diseases such as cancer, cystic fibrosis and heart 
disease.  
Human physiology, a branch of general physiology, is concerned with how 
the human body works. It is common to approach the study of human 
physiology 
through 
an 
organ-system 
approach. Organ-systems are 
collections of cells, tissues and organs, which have dedicated functions in 
the body. In the human body, the organ-systems are the nervous system, 
endocrine system, cardiovascular system, respiratory system, urinary system, 
musculoskeletal system, integumentary system, reproductive system, 
digestive system, and immune system. While the proper function of each 
organ-system is essential, it is the collective and integrative functions of all 
organ-systems that contribute to a healthy state. A thorough study of human 
physiology includes an understanding of the organ-systems as well as the 
underlying tissue, cellular, and molecular principles. Human physiology is a 
life science and a branch of animal physiology. It is specifically the study of 
how systems of the body function in a well state, and this analysis of 
function is often at the cellular level, not of single cells but of how cells 
work in concert to achieve a normal state of function. Basic human 
physiology studies the body‘s systems that function appropriately and as 
expected, while other disciplines like patho physiology may look at the way 
body systems develop disease in attempts to find insight into how to cure 
diseases. 
There may be several main concerns in human physiology from a scientific 
standpoint. These concerns include the way interdependence between body 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 334 
 
systems occurs (such as the central nervous system and the musculoskeletal 
system). This is called integration. 
Another point of interest is communication, which is how the body‘s 
systems send signals to function in specific ways. These signals could be 
electrical impulses or the release of chemicals. Lastly, the physiologist wants 
to define and observe homeostasis, in any of the systems studied. In other 
words how does the body maintain a normal state, and what are the 
processes by which it does so? 
It might be oversimplification to say that human physiology attempts to 
answer the question of ―how things work.‖ However, this is fairly accurate, 
and it‘s an important question to answer. Understanding the normal function 
of the body‘s systems is valuable because it establishes baselines for 
understanding what is abnormal. It is very difficult to diagnose disease 
unless a clear deviation from the norm can be determined, and therefore 
establishing this norm is of great value in medicine and in human health. 
For instance, over time, physiology and biochemistry have helped to 
determine what constitutes normal blood levels of certain substances. When 
something like sugar levels become too high, it may have impact on various 
systems in the body and be indication of diseases like diabetes. Only by 
knowing baseline levels for various sugar types in blood, can doctors 
determine whether diabetes is present. This knowledge has been 
extrapolated to allow patients to keep records of their own blood sugar at 
home. With testing they can be assured that they are regulating blood sugar 
appropriately or they can make medication adjustments when blood sugar 
levels are too high or too low. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 335 
 
It‘s suggested that early studies in human physiology and anatomy began 
over 2000 years ago, and names like Hippocrates and Aristotle are usually 
given as early physiologists. The trouble with early thought was it didn‘t 
allow for many examinations of humans, and most humans examined were 
dead. The idea of cells wouldn‘t be posited until much later in history. Much 
more was done in the field of anatomy, which is an intricately related 
discipline to human physiology, that describes the forms present in the body, 
and yet again, unless these forms were obvious and on the surface, they 
typically didn‘t get much exploration unless a person was dead. 
More studies were possible on animals, and actually animal physiology is 
still used and extrapolated to human beings all of the time. Even today when 
medical science is much more delicate, most well humans would not consent 
to studies of some of the ways their body systems work. Few people would 
volunteer to have abnormal rhythms of their heart induced as part of 
electrophysiological cardiology studies 
to 
determine 
what 
causes 
arrhythmias, as this might be dangerous. However electro physiologists can 
induce arrhythmias in animals to determine what factors destroy balance in 
the electrical system in the heart. 
Over time, human physiology has helped to define the major systems of the 
body and how they work to achieve wellness. Basic introductory courses 
tend to look at each of these systems, which may be roughly defined as the 
following: circulatory, respiratory, endocrine, reproductive, immune, 
musculoskeletal, nervous, integumentory, renal, and gastrointestinal. 
While breaking the body into systems can help describe function, it isn‘t 
always so neat from a scientific standpoint. Systems are interdependent on 
each other. Lose renal or respiratory function, and everything else becomes 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 336 
 
affected. Moreover, many vital organs or parts of the body may participate 
in several systems. 
The major systems covered in the study of human physiology are as 
follows: 
 Circulatory system: including the heart, the blood vessels, properties of 
the blood and how circulation works in sickness and in health 
 Digestive/excretory system: this domain charts the movement of solids 
from the mouth to the anus, and includes study of the spleen, liver and 
pancreas, the conversion of food into fuel and its consequent expulsion 
from the body 
 Endocrine system: the study of endocrine hormones that carry signals 
throughout the organism, helping it to respond in concert. The principal 
endocrine glands - the pituitary, thyroid, adrenals, pancreas, parathyroid 
and gonads - are a major focus, but nearly all organs release endocrine 
hormones 
 Immune system: the body's natural defense system comprises of white 
blood cells, the thymus and lymph systems. A complex array of receptors 
and molecules combine to protect the host from attacks by pathogens. 
Molecules such as antibodies and cytokines feature heavily 
 Integumentary system: the skin, hair, nails, sweat glands and sebaceous 
glands (secreting an oily or waxy substance) 
 Musculoskeletal system: the skeleton and muscles, tendons, ligaments 
and cartilage. Bone marrow - the site of red blood cell creation - and how 
bones store calcium and phosphate are included 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 337 
 
 Nervous system: the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) and 
the peripheral nervous system. Study of the nervous system includes 
research into the senses, memory, emotion and thought 
 Renal/urinary system: including the kidneys, ureters, bladder and 
urethra, this system removes water from the blood, produces urine and 
carries away waste 
 Reproductive system: consisting of the gonads and the sex organs. Study 
of this system also includes investigating the way a fetus is produced and 
nurtured for 9 months 
 Respiratory system: consisting of the nose, naso pharynx, trachea, and 
lungs. This system brings in oxygen and expels carbon dioxide and water. 
Other branches of physiology 
 
Defense physiology investigates nature's natural defensive reactions. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 338 
 
There are a great number of disciplines that use the word physiology in their 
title. Below are some of the other physiological topics that have some 
relevance to medical science: 
 Cell physiology: studying the way cells work and interact, cell 
physiology predominantly concentrates on membrane transport and 
neuron transmission 
 Systems physiology: this discipline focuses on the computational and 
mathematical modeling of complex biological systems. It looks to 
describe the way individual cells or components of a system converge to 
respond as a whole. They often investigate metabolic networks and cell 
signaling 
 Evolutionary physiology: studying the way systems or parts thereof have 
adapted and changed over multiple generations. Research topics cover a 
lot of ground including the role of behavior in evolution, sexual selection 
and physiological changes in relation to geographic variation 
 Defense physiology: changes that occur as a reaction to a potential threat, 
such as preparation for the fight-or-flight response 
 Exercise physiology: as the name suggests, this is the study of the 
physiology of physical exercise. This might include research into 
bioenergetics, biochemistry, cardiopulmonary function, biomechanics, 
hematology, skeletal muscle physiology, neuro endocrine function and 
nervous system function. 
The topics mentioned above are but a small fraction of the available 
physiologies. The field of physiology is as essential as it is vast. 
Exercise Physiology is the identification of physiological mechanisms 
underlying physical activity, the comprehensive delivery of treatment 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 339 
 
services concerned with the analysis, improvement, and maintenance of 
health and fitness, rehabilitation of heart disease and other chronic diseases 
and/or disabilities. 
Sports science (also sport science) is a discipline that studies how the 
healthy human body works during exercise, and how sport and physical 
activity promote health from cellular to whole body perspectives. The study 
of sports science traditionally incorporates areas of physiology (exercise 
physiology), psychology (sportpsychology), anatomy, 
biomechanics, biochemistry and biokinetics. 
Sports 
scientists 
and 
performance consultants are growing in demand and employment numbers, 
with the ever-increasing focus within the sporting world on achieving the 
best results possible. Through the study of science and sport, researchers 
have developed a greater understanding on how the human body reacts to 
exercise, training, different environments and many other stimuli. Exercise 
physiology is the physiology of physical exercise. It is the study of the acute 
responses and chronic adaptations to a wide range of exercise conditions. 
Exercise physiologists study the effect of exercise on pathology, and the 
mechanisms by which exercise can reduce or reverse disease progression. 
Exercise Physiology is the study of how exercise alters the function and 
structure of the body. A sports physiologist examines the acute responses 
and chronic adaptations to athletic performance in a variety of environments. 
Sports physiology is the study of the long-and short-term effects of training 
and conditions on athletes. This specialized field of study goes hand in hand 
with human anatomy. Anatomy is about structure, where physiology is about 
function. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 340 
 
Sports Training Principles are heavily rooted in this field. Effects of body 
composition, flexibility training, hydration, environmental conditions, and 
carbohydrate loading on athletic performance are only a few of the topics 
explored in this field. 
Exercise physiologists, physicians, and athletic trainers can apply research 
findings from studies to advise athletes on topics concerning nutrition, sport-
related injuries, and other issues related to sports medicine. 
Exercise Physiology is the study of how exercise alters the function and 
structure of the body. A sports physiologist examines the acute responses 
and chronic adaptations to athletic performance in a variety of environments. 
The physiologist possesses a wide-ranging understanding of the body, 
enabling them to advise athletes and coaches of how training and preparation 
influence competition performance. 
Testing can take place in the lab, which ensures a controlled environment to 
compare exercise test results. However, it is not always possible to simulate 
sporting activity in a lab and with advances in technology physiologists use 
field-based testing as much as possible. This work is vital as it can evaluate 
training as it happens; allowing the athlete and coach to objectively monitor 
what impact a particular session has had on the body. 
Physiology can improve an athlete‘s performance by giving important 
objective information which can help coaches to adapt training programmes 
to maximize their desired outcome. This will depend on many factors 
including the environment, diet, gender, age and health.  
Exercise Physiology is the identification of physiological mechanisms 
underlying physical activity, the comprehensive delivery of treatment 
services concerned with the analysis, improvement, and maintenance of 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 341 
 
health and fitness, rehabilitation of heart disease and other chronic diseases 
and/or disabilities, and the professional guidance and counsel of athletes and 
others interested in athletics, sports training, and human adaptability to acute 
and chronic exercise. 
What Is Neuromuscular Junction? 
 
A motor neuron is responsible for causing a skeletal muscle to 
contract, by stimulating it. The gap or space present between this 
motor neuron and the skeletal muscle cell is called as a synapse. This 
synapse, specifically between the skeletal muscle cell and motor 
neuron is called neuromuscular junction or myoneural. Myo means 
Muscle and Neural means Nerves. When an impulse travels between 
this space, muscle contraction happens. 
There are around 100-500 trillion such connections in the human 
brain, between two nerves or nerves and glands. In this article we will 
discuss only the neuromuscular junction. 
Structure of Neuromuscular Junction 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 342 
 
As we have read, a neuromuscular junction consists of a neuron and a 
skeletal muscle cell. The neuron in the combination is referred to as 
spinal motor neuron. The motor neurons, who originate from the 
spinal cord, innervate the skeletal muscle fibers. The innervations 
happens by very fine processes of the axon. The synapses are present 
along these processes and are also known as motor endplate, because 
of its specific structure. 
The neuromuscular junction synapse has 3 characteristic features: 
1. There are two membranes called the pre and post synaptic 
membranes. There exists a distinct space between these membranes 
and is known as Synaptic Cleft. 
2. High density of small spherical vesicles is present, which contain 
neurotransmitter substances. 
3. A thickened post synaptic membrane is present, which has high 
density of receptors that are responsible for binding the chemical 
substances which transmit the signal from the pre synaptic neuron. 
Functions of Neuromuscular Junction 
Before going in detail, let us remember the broad action of this 
junction. It is to act like a bridge between a neuron and muscle cell to 
transmit the signals. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 343 
 
 
Motor Neuron—Synaptic Cleft—Skeletal Muscle Cell 
Calcium makes an entry in the excited motor neuron, which in turn 
causes exocytosis of the neurotransmitter. Which means the 
neurotransmitter gets transported to the only place available – the 
synaptic cleft. Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter secreted by the 
somatic motor neurons. 
There are receptors of acetylcholine present in the skeletal muscle 
cells. So this secreted acetylcholine then passes the cleft by diffusion 
and bind with the receptors. They are like puzzle pieces which fit or 
key which opens the door. This process opens an ion channel through 
which sodium ions pass to the muscle cells. At that time potassium 
ions diffuse out of muscle cells. However, the amount of Sodium ions 
entering is higher than the number of potassium ions leaving. Once the 
sodium ion reaches the muscle cell, it depolarizes, because it is a 
positive ion. This causes the skeletal muscle cell membrane to get 
excited and contract. This is referred to as Action Potential being 
triggered. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 344 
 
The acetylcholine does not remain in the synaptic cleft of the 
neuromuscular junction forever. This is to ensure that it does not cause 
over contraction of the muscle or keep the muscle contracted for 
longer than required. An enzyme called as Acetyl cholinesterase is 
responsible in acting as a catalyst in breaking down the acetylcholine 
present in the synaptic cleft. It gives rise to acetate and choline, which 
are then transported back to the synaptic cleft, where they are re-
synthesized. This is called as Active Reuptake. 
Neuromuscular Junction Disorders ‗ 
Some of the disorders affecting the neuromuscular junction are 
Myasthenia Gravis, Botulism, Eaton-Lambert syndrome etc. The 
neuromuscular junction can also malfunction when exposed to certain 
antibiotics, organophosphates which are type of insecticides, curare 
which is a toxin derived from plants and gases used in chemical 
warfare. Some of these things work by preventing the breakdown of 
acetylcholine after the transmission of the nerve impulse. While some 
of the disorders cause over activity of the muscles as described below: 
 person syndrome: Antibodies attack nerve cells – responsible for 
muscle regulation - present in the brain and spinal cord and cause 
them to be continuously stimulated. Due to this they become stiff. 
 Isaacs’s syndrome: In this the nerves keep sending impulses to the 
muscles which causes them to be over stimulated and ultimately 
stiffen. They also tend to twitch, due to which they find exercising 
and normal activities difficult to perform. 
Fuel for muscular activity. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 345 
 
Your body is your vehicle, so you have to keep your engine — your heart — 
running when you work out.  
 
 
That means fueling up your tank with the right foods and your radiator with 
the right fluids, using with right amounts at the right times. The American 
College of Sports Medicine says, ―Adequate food and fluid should be 
consumed before, during, and after exercise to help maintain blood glucose 
concentration during exercise, maximize exercise performance, and improve 
recovery time. Athletes should be well hydrated before exercise and drink 
enough fluid during and after exercise to balance fluid losses.‖ 
Not fueling up before you work out is like ―driving a car on empty,‖ said 
Platt, an American Heart Association volunteer. You also won‘t have 
enough energy to maximize your workout and you limit your ability to burn 
calories.  
Ideally, fuel up two hours before you exercise by: 
 Hydrating with water. 
 Eating healthy carbohydrates such as whole-grain cereals (with low-
fat or skim milk), whole-wheat toast (without the fatty cream cheese), 
low-fat or fat-free yogurt, whole grain pasta, brown rice, fruits and 
vegetables. 
 Avoiding saturated fats and even a lot of healthy protein — because 
these types of fuels digest slower in your stomach and take away 
oxygen and energy-delivering blood from your muscles.  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 346 
 
If you only have 5-10 minutes before you exercise, eat a piece of fruit such 
as an apple or banana. 
―The key is to consume easily digested carbohydrates, so you don’t feel 
sluggish,‖ 
Whether you‘re a professional athlete who trains for several hours or you 
have a low to moderate routine, keep your body hydrated with small, 
frequent sips of water. 
According to researchers don‘t need to eat during a workout that‘s an hour 
or less. But, for longer, high intensity vigorous workouts, she recommends 
eating 50-100 calories every half hour of carbohydrates such as raisins, an 
energy bar or banana. 
 Fluids. Drink water, of course. Blend your water with 100% juice 
such as orange juice which provides fluids, carbohydrates. 
  
 Carbohydrates. You burn a lot of carbohydrates — the main fuel for 
your muscles — when you exercise. In the 20-60 minutes after your 
workout, your muscles can store carbohydrates and protein as energy 
and help in recovery. 
 
 Protein. Eat things with protein to help repair and grow your muscles. 
It‘s important to realize that these are general guidelines. We have 
different digestive systems and ―a lot depends on what kind of 
workout you‘re doing,‖ Platt said. 
 
So do what works best for you. Know that what you put in your body 
(nutrition) is as important as you what you do with your body 
(exercise). Both are crucial to keeping your engine performing at its 
best. 
How to Fuel Muscles during Exercise – Understanding the Importance of 
Carbohydrates 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 347 
 
Adopting a regular exercise routine is one of the best things that you can do 
for your long-term health. 
Exercise benefits all tissues in the body, and with each passing year research 
continues to learn more about the benefits of frequent and consistent 
movement. Over the course of 10 years of nutrition and fitness research 
science, I‘ve developed a huge appreciation for the benefits of exercise, that 
seem almost too numerous to count. 
Simply stated, exercise benefits all organ systems in the human body, 
including your heart, blood vessels, muscles, bones, ligaments, tendons, 
immune system, intestines, liver, pancreas and brain. That‘s right, even 
tissues that have nothing to do with performing exercise receive the benefit 
of frequent activity. Understanding how to fuel muscle during exercise is the 
first step in optimizing your individual athletic recovery program. 
Exercise is a Beneficial Stress 
Exercise is considered a ―stress‖ too many organ systems, but differs from 
the negative stress of everyday life in that it stimulates the breakdown, repair 
and growth of muscles, ligaments, tendons and bones in the process of 
creating a stronger and more resilient body. 
 
During exercise, muscles must perform two main tasks: Oxidize or ―burn‖ 
available fuel for energy. Contract in response to a rush of electrical signals 
from the brain 
By accomplishing both tasks simultaneously, the muscle performs work, 
generating heat, waste products and the need for increased blood flow. 
Here‘s a behind-the-scenes look at what fuels your muscles are using to 
power you during your workouts. 
Muscle Fuel during Exercise 
The muscle is capable of burning multiple fuels during exercise, including 
glucose (from carbohydrates), fatty acids (from fat) and amino acids (from 
protein). 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 348 
 
In the same way that a car stores fuel in a fuel tank, muscles have evolved 
the ability to store glucose, fatty acids and amino acids on-board. All three 
fuels are burned for energy in the mitochondria, organelles within muscle 
cells that function much like a car engine. 
 
Even though a car only has one engine, a single muscle cell often contains 
hundreds of mitochondria in order to generate large amounts of energy 
during exercise. In this way, the muscle is specifically designed to generate 
massive amounts of energy on the fly. 
Glucose is Stored as Glycogen 
Glucose is stored within each muscle cell as glycogen. Glycogen is 
specifically designed for quick-burning energy, and fast acting enzymes in 
the muscle cell allow for easy access to this large reservoir of fuel. 
Many people believe that carbohydrates are the enemy and should be 
avoided at all costs.  On the contrary – dietary carbohydrates contribute to 
glycogen stores, literally fueling your muscle tissue. 
Just make sure that your carbohydrates come from REAL sources, and not 
from fake and refined products.  
Fatty Acids are Stored as Triglyceride 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 349 
 
Fatty acids are stored within muscle cells as triglycerides. Muscle 
triglycerides are stored in a lipid droplet that can be accessed by a different 
set of enzymes, providing a secondary fuel source during exercise. 
Amino Acids are Stored as Muscle Protein 
Finally, amino acids are stored within the muscle tissue as muscle protein. If 
a muscle cell were a car, the muscle protein is the metal frame of the car that 
provides structure and rigidity. Think of muscle protein as the infrastructure 
of the muscle tissue itself. Unlike glucose and fatty acids, there is no storage 
tank for amino acids in the muscle tissue. The muscle itself is the storage 
tank. 
 
  
The Choice of Fuel Depends on Exercise Intensity 
Even though all three muscle fuels are available for use during exercise, the 
muscle is making moment-by-moment decisions on which fuel to burn, 
depending mainly on the intensity and duration of exercise being performed. 
At low intensities, fatty acids are the main fuel source and only small 
amounts of glycogen are broken down.  As the intensity of exercise 
increases, larger amounts of glycogen are broken down and burned for 
energy, making glucose the predominant fuel source.  As you can see in the 
graph below, as the intensity of exercise increases, the dependence on 
carbohydrate goes up and the dependence on fatty acids goes down. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 350 
 
 
You may notice that only carbohydrate and fat are fuel sources shown in the 
above graph.  That‘s because amino acids are the lowest priority fuel, given 
that it is the infrastructure of the muscle tissue itself.  In order to preserve 
muscle mass, the muscle will burn glucose and fatty acids before resorting to 
amino acids. 
Muscle Micro trauma 
Even though amino acids from muscle protein are the last choice for fuel 
during exercise, microscopic tears result from repeated muscle contractions, 
called micro trauma.  These microscopic tears are one of the signals that the 
muscle requires in order to repair during rest. 
Think of micro trauma as the repeated wear-and-tear that your car 
experiences from driving long distances.  In the same way that you replace 
damaged engine parts with newer and more efficient technology, micro 
trauma to muscle protein requires repair immediately following exercise. 
Lucky for you, when muscle tissue repairs itself, the muscle will 
overcompensate by creating stronger, more resilient muscle protein so that 
the risk of repeated damage is reduced. 
Overcompensation is exactly why muscles get stronger over time.  Enzymes 
that partake in the muscle repair process ―overreact‖ to micro trauma in 
anticipation of future damage. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 351 
 
Amino acids from dietary protein are used as the building blocks for new 
muscle protein.  This is why protein is often considered an essential 
component of your post-workout recovery meal. 
Muscle is the largest type of tissue in your body, and is extremely malleable 
because it responds to the type, duration and intensity of exercise that you 
perform.  Frequently exercised muscle tissue is in a constant state of 
remodeling, leading to increases in endurance, strength, flexibility and 
power. 
The next time you perform a workout, keep in mind that your muscle is 
performing a number of tasks at the same time, including the following: 
 Choosing between glucose and fatty acids for energy 
 Protecting muscle protein from being used as a fuel source 
 Contracting repeatedly, hundreds to thousands of times in a single 
exercise session 
 Role of oxygen- physical training, oxygen debt, second wind, vital 
capacity. 
The day-to-day variability in oxygen consumption in most physical actions 
is about 5%, and differences of 10% of this percentage among individuals 
can be expected. Energy costs vary greatly in different sports; eg, for a 150-
lb player, 4.4 kcal/minute in archery, 9.1 kcal/minute in field hockey, 13.3 
kcal/minute in judo, and 18.6 kcal/minute in squash.  
 
 
Energy output also varies in the same sport depending on such factors as 
intensity of competition, neuromuscular skill level, position demands, 
performance level, age, body type, atmospheric conditions, and field 
conditions. In exercise physiology, however, it has been shown to be valid to 
measure energy expenditure of muscle tissue in terms of oxygen 
consumption in liters/minute but not valid to convert such data into energy 
units of watts or kilocalories/minute. 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 352 
 
Metabolic capacity, maximum oxygen-intake capacity, and maximum 
oxygen-debt capacity are the current priority concerns of exercise 
physiologists. 
1. Metabolic capacity determines the amount of activity possible 
for approximately 2-3 hours through the maximum quantity of 
energy-yielding substrates available from body reserves during 
maximum aerobic demands. 
2.   Maximum oxygen-intake capacity (aerobic power) determines 
the amount of activity possible for approximately 15-30 minutes 
through coordinated circulatory and respiratory adjustments 
producing the maximum amount of tissue oxygen. 
3.   Maximum oxygen-debt capacity (anaerobic power) determines the 
amount of activity possible with all-out effort for approximately 50 seconds 
through anaerobic release mechanisms. 
When muscular effort must be prolonged longer than a minute, performance 
becomes increasingly dependent upon the demands of holistic homeostasis 
and not just that of active tissues. Basically, this involves oxygen supply, 
carbon dioxide removal, heat balance, and the replenishment of nutrients. 
 
 
Metabolism  
 
To maintain health, stored resources (potential energy) must be kept in 
balance with power expenditures (kinetic energy). While carbohydrate and 
fat are normally oxidized almost completely in the human body, protein is 
not. Protein derivatives of uric acid, urea, and creatinine are excreted in the 
urine. In addition, not all food ingested is absorbed; that is, 97% of 
carbohydrate, 95% of fat, and 92% of protein ingested is absorbed, and these 
numbers do not consider the "coarseness" of foodstuffs such as coarse corn 
meal or roughly ground whole grains. 
Metabolic Rate.   Metabolic rate is directly proportional to gross body 
weight. Such factors as lean body mass, age, diet, sex, height, surface area, 
and race do not have a significant influence on metabolic rate during 
physical activity. The greater the energy demands, the higher the 
requirement for oxygen consumption. Total energy is the result of the basal 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 353 
 
(waking state) metabolic rate plus the energy necessary for work. This offers 
a ratio that can be used as an index to measure exercise intensity and 
performance efficiency. In a given period of time, energy output intensity is 
directly related to mechanical performance, measured by oxygen 
consumption in a specified period. In this sense, oxygen consumption can be 
considered a reflection of metabolic power. 
Metabolic Capacity.   Metabolic capacity is directly related to performance 
capacity, reflecting the quantity of energy-yielding nutrients available (2-3 
hours) from body reserves under aerobic conditions. Thus, one's maximum 
aerobic power and metabolic capacity are closely related, yet there are many 
individual differences. Besides metabolic capacity, other indices may be 
used such as those of glycogen storage, cardiac output, and water-balance 
efficiency. 
 
Aerobic Power  
To produce necessary energy, the body uses an aerobic (oxygen) pathway 
and an anaerobic (no oxygen) pathway. To maintain life, the primary factor 
is the continuous and adequate flow of oxygen.  
Restricted oxygen flow quickly manifests in function deterioration as seen 
clinically following infarcts and strokes, underscoring why so much 
emphasis is placed on oxygen demands during physical, psychological, and 
environmental stress. Life signs and the degree of life are routinely 
evaluated from detectable arterial pulsation, breathing quantity and quality 
and rhythm, temperature, and reflexes -all of which are related to oxygen 
flow. 
 
When oxygen demands exceed supply (oxygen debt) during and following 
prolonged exertion, lactic acid accumulates within muscle tissue and 
encourages fatigue. The greater the exercise intensity, the greater the lactic 
acid accumulation. Following maximum exercise, it may take an hour or 
longer to attain resting levels. Oxygen debt must be repaid rapidly such as 
through hyperpnoea. 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 354 
 
 
Anaerobic Power  
Short bursts of effort primarily using explosive strength requiring less than 
120 seconds are considered anaerobic activities. Because blood, circulation, 
respiration, and all the other factors contributing to human function during 
effort cannot be produced on a moment's notice, nature provides certain 
limited anaerobic mechanisms to meet the metabolic demands of active 
cells. Even with minimal work intensity, there is a period of oxygen 
deficiency that disturbs homeostasis and sets in motion a call for restoration 
at a higher metabolic level. 
Both aerobic and anaerobic mechanisms determine an individual's 
performance capacity, but anaerobic activity is maintained only for a short 
time. An anaerobic state exists when oxygen is not used to produce energy 
and when glucose and glycogen reserves are used. The greater the intensity 
of the effort, the greater the anaerobic energy contribution. This can be 
measured by the amount of oxygen intake during the recovery period, 
usually attaining its peak (maximum oxygen debt) in about 50 seconds after 
intense exercise begins. If performance demands are great enough to exceed 
maximum oxygen transport capabilities, performance proceeds only until 
anaerobic energy stores become exhausted. 
An index of work capacity is mechanical power of an anaerobic nature. 
Common tests are (1) running staircases, as the energy requirement for 
maintaining speed in running a specified distance depends on mechanical 
performance during the period and (2) using a bicycle ergometer, where the 
mechanical work is calculated by recording through a photoelectric circuit 
the number of wheel revolutions. Activity examples also include weight 
lifting, throwing, 100-yard dash, 100-meter freestyle swim, a basketball fast 
break, or running bases in baseball. 
 
Interval Training  
Interval training was developed because of problems associated with lactic 
acid buildup. Workouts interspersed with rest periods diminish a large 
accumulation of lactic acid and delay fatigue. Sessions require strict 
administration. It consists of repetitive efforts in which distance is set and 
pace is timed with established intervals for recovery between efforts. Long 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 355 
 
runs increase aerobic capacity, and fast, short run increase anaerobic power 
and strength. As conditioning progresses, the time is shortened, the number 
of runs is increased, and the number of rest intervals is decreased. 
 
The interval pattern of effort and rest for a specific amount of work and time 
critically determines the rise of excessive lactate levels, which, as previously 
explained, is a major cause of fatigue. In long-term events, it is important for 
an individual to keep high energy demands met by anti lactic acid reserves 
and try to tactically have the competition exceed their reserves. 
 
Pace and recovery time is usually determined by pulse rate rather than time. 
Some authorities state that heart rate must be 60% of the available range 
from rest to the maximum attainable (eg, 140+ beats/minute during running) 
to develop a rate decrease of the working heart. Thus, they claim, an athlete's 
pulse below 140/minute indicates a need for a faster run or swim. Once 
pulse rate decreases to a desired level, rest intervals are ended. Such 
conclusions, however, fail to consider many unique individual factors. 
 
 
The Pulmonary Apparatus  
The level of oxygen saturation greatly determines the oxygen-carrying 
capacity of the blood, and oxygen saturation depends on factors determining 
the quality and quantity of oxygen diffusion in the lungs. These factors 
include  
(1) the quality of pulmonary blood flow and neuromuscular mechanisms,  
(2) the lung area available for the diffusing process,  
(3) the time duration in which blood receives alveolar-capillary exposure,  
(4) the thickness of the alveolar-capillary membrane,  
(5) the alveolar air and pulmonary capillaries oxygen pressure differential, 
and  
(6) respiratory frequency, which is often linked in the athlete with the 
rhythm of movement.  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 356 
 
It therefore becomes apparent that the quality of oxygen transport is 
contingent on the blood, the cardiovascular system, and the pulmonary-
respiratory system. 
Ventilation.   Lung function is evaluated by physiologists by measuring 
pulmonary residual volume and vital capacity -the components of total lung 
volume. As an index to breathing capacity, vital capacity is calculated from 
the maximum amount of air exhaled after a maximum inhalation. About 
20% of vital capacity is used during rest. About 70% might be used during 
prolonged exercise. Up to a quarter of external ventilation is "wasted" in 
pulmonary "dead space" due to the incomplete mixing of alveolar and 
airway air, enhanced by an athlete's or a laborer's typically diminished 
respiratory rate.  
 
 
Ventilation efficiency is assisted as tidal volume increases with decreased 
respiratory frequency for given total ventilation. More commonly, 
ventilation efficiency is judged by the quantity of air inhaled or exhaled in 
relation to the amount of oxygen absorbed. Such measurements must take 
into consideration varying atmospheric conditions and individual metabolic 
needs. Because adequate oxygen is essential for life, both oxygen demands 
and oxygen consumption must be considered. 
 
 
Lactic Formation and "Choked" Performance.   It has been described 
that during heavy exercise lactic acid accumulates within muscle as a result 
of oxygen demands exceeding oxygen supply. Choking of performance 
because of excessive competition or poor pacing may lead to early anaerobic 
demands on metabolism. The result is lactate accumulation, witnessed as a 
premature distressing hyperventilation. Local muscle weakness may also 
induce premature breathlessness.  
 
 
Hyperventilation from premature lactate accumulation can cause a person to 
exceed normal ventilation adjustments where oxygen delivered to the 
circulation is less than the corresponding demand for oxygen consumption. 
It is thus important for an athlete to avoid lactate accumulation until late in 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 357 
 
activity. If local muscle weakness is the cause, the situation can be corrected 
by strengthening exercises so the athlete can operate nearer aerobic power 
before lactate accumulates sufficiently. Marathon runners usually operate 
just under their lactate threshold until the final sprint. 
 
 
Second Wind.   A "second wind" is considered an opposite reaction to that 
found with choked performance. While early lactate accumulation may be 
the result of physiologic forces (eg, cardio respiratory maladjustment), with 
prolonged activity systemic blood pressure rises, movement pace is steadied, 
ventilation diminishes, and the respiratory muscles become "warmed-up", 
which reduces respiratory resistance and awareness of breathing, and the 
level of circulating lactate is lowered. Other mechanisms may also be 
involved. 
 
Diffusing Capacity.   Many well-conditioned athletes, especially swimmers 
and other endurance-related participants, exhibit a large pulmonary diffusing 
capacity (larger pulmonary surface) that enhances oxygen transfer. These 
athletes also exhibit an increased ratio of oxygen intake to lung ventilation 
per minute, which decreases as exhaustion approaches. However, even with 
maximum effort, the equilibrium of pulmonary gases between the blood 
stream and alveolar spaces is fairly complete. Thus, a gain in diffusing 
capacity offers little benefit except for swimmers who deliberately hold their 
breath or for athletes performing at high altitudes. 
Carbon-Dioxide Homeostasis.   Both low and high levels of carbon dioxide 
affect normal tissue function. Excessive carbon dioxide elimination may be 
encountered in high altitudes, witnessed by intermittent ventilation and 
symptoms of mountain sickness; ie, dyspnea, headache, blood pressure and 
pulse rate changes, and neurologic disorders due to maladjustment to 
reduced oxygen pressure at high altitudes. Accumulation of carbon dioxide 
is unusual except for the scuba diver due to the increased rate of carbon 
dioxide production, the decreased maximum voluntary ventilation, the added 
external dead weight, and the possible inefficiency of the carbon dioxide-
absorbing canisters. 
 
The Circulatory System  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 358 
 
 
Blood transports oxygen, energy substrates, and metabolic wastes. It also 
serves a vital role in temperature regulation. Reduced blood volume, reduced 
red cells, and reduced hemoglobin lower the body's capacity for aerobic 
activity. Each tissue has a range of functional response with definite limits of 
adaptation. In this sense, blood oxygen transport capability is limited by its 
capacity to carry oxygen (ie, hemoglobin content and oxygen saturation).  
 
An individual's pulmonary blood flow, lung diffusing capacity, rate of 
oxygen removal, and total hemoglobin all have a close relationship with 
maximum oxygen intake. Total hemoglobin determines the potential arterial 
capacity to transport oxygen. For example, low hemoglobin levels in an 
athlete are often attributed to increased cell destruction, as shown by 
increases in circulating haptoglobins from increased rates in blood flow or 
extrinsic trauma (eg, runner's feet, boxer's abdomen). Dietary habits are 
more significant than the minute amounts of iron lost in perspiration. 
Cardiac Output.   Blood oxygen transport also depends on cardiac output. 
While evaluation of cardiac output during exertion is helpful in diagnosis, 
stroke volume is difficult to determine directly. Cardiac output increases 
with work intensity and is directly related to the quantity of oxygen intake: 
maximum heart output parallels maximum oxygen intake. Such factors as 
heat exposure and/or dehydration influence stroke volume and change the 
relationship between heart rate and stroke volume that alters the relationship 
between oxygen consumption and heart rate.  
 
 
Cardiac output effectiveness is also determined by relative circulatory 
distribution among active muscles, viscera, and skin. The maximum limits of 
stroke volume are determined by the type of exercise and body posture. For 
example, in comparison to a runner or swimmer who uses most of the body, 
a cyclist, in not using his upper extremities for propulsion, often pools a 
large amount of blood within upper extremity veins. The consequence of this 
is a reduced stroke volume in the cyclist. 
 
 
Oxygen Pulse.   During exertion, cardiac stroke volume increases and the 
active cells take more oxygen from arterial blood. Both of these factors 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 359 
 
increase oxygen delivery to cells. The term "oxygen pulse" refers to the 
quantity of oxygen removed from the blood during each pulse. It is 
measured in a specified period by dividing oxygen intake by heart rate. 
Oxygen pulse increases during exertion, reaching its typical maximum of 
from 11 to 17 ml at about 135 pulses per minute and decreasing after further 
cardiac acceleration. 
 
 
Heart Rate.   Heart rate is closely correlated with maximum oxygen intake. 
Typically, heart rate is parallel with performance intensity, but maximum 
cardiac rate decreases with advancing age. There is a linear relationship 
between heart rate and metabolic rate. Due to the wide variance in individual 
balance between sympathetic and vagal drives to the cardiac pacemaker, the 
resting heart rate of the endurance-trained athlete may reach lows of 30 per 
minute. The maximum sustained heart rate during competition is about 185-
195 per minute or less. In activities of high stress and isometric exertion (eg, 
skiing), peak heart rates of 250 per minute or more may be briefly 
encountered. 
 
Blood and Pulse Pressures.   Blood pressure and pulse pressure also have a 
close relationship with maximum oxygen intake. To meet oxygen demands 
during prolonged exertion, the blood quantity in the muscles and the blood 
flow within the lungs must be increased. By increasing the force of heart 
muscle contraction, systolic blood pressure is raised as heart rate increases. 
This increase is minimized in the well-trained athlete. This is attributed to 
decreased peripheral resistance because of vasodilatation.  
 
 
Pulse pressure, the difference between systolic and diastolic pressures, offers 
an index to the efficiency of cardiac contraction and stroke volume. 
Difficulties in the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide in active tissues 
are rarely anticipated except in specific types of events. For example, an 
overland cyclist may complain of pain and weakness in leg muscles during 
hill ascents. This is apparently caused by local circulatory obstruction 
resulting from vigorous quadriceps contractions. However, if activity can be 
continued in spite of the pain, increased systemic blood pressure tends to 
overcome the local vascular occlusion. This phenomenon is thought to be a 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 360 
 
manifestation of the heart failing to develop an immediate and adequate 
increase in blood pressure. 
 EXCLUSION 
CRITERIA 
FOR 
POTENTIALLY 
HARMFUL 
ACTIVITY 
While the scope of this paper cannot include all possible types of 
dysfunction and pathologic structural disorders that would exclude an 
individual from a specific activity, certain guidelines can be used to support 
the physician's decision. The base for discussion here is the athlete, but a 
person involved in strenuous physical labor would be just as appropriate. 
2. Whatever the circumstances and pressures, no athlete should be 
allowed to risk permanent injury. An athlete is either capable 
from a health standpoint or not. 
2.   An athlete should be allowed to participate in the sport of his or 
her choice if practice and competition can be without danger to self 
or squad. 
3.   As all sports contain some risk, one sport or level of 
competition (intramural vs. varsity) should not be considered 
safer than another in itself. Impartiality must be constantly held. 
However, the risk of a disability must be differentiated between 
one sport or position, and the demands involved, and another 
sport or position. For instance, ankle weakness may be viewed 
differently in a running sport than in polo. 
 
4.   Before any screening, evaluation, diagnostic, or therapeutic 
procedure is used, informed consent must be given. 
A physician wins no friends when he must disqualify a motivated athlete or 
a willing worker who depends on a particular job for his livelihood. Yet, any 
acute or chronic disease process is reason for disqualification until health is 
attained. A weakened player is not the equal of a healthy player, and the risk 
of injury is far higher. 
 
Acquired Disorders  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 361 
 
Self-limiting infections require only temporary exclusion. While competition 
during mild coryza may be permitted, fever is a strict reason for exclusion. A 
low-grade tonsillitis or dental sepsis may result in poor performance and 
greater risk. As a guide, the "step test" is often used for signaling if an 
athlete is ready to return to active competition after an infection. 
 
The player steps on and off an 18-inch platform at a rate of 30 times per 
minute. The examiner records the player's pulse rate at 30 seconds, 1 minute, 
2 minutes, and 3 minutes after the exercise. The following formula is then 
applied: 
Duration of exercise in seconds x 100/2 x sum of any 3 pulse counts 
during recovery 
The higher the index, the better the person's status. An athlete is not ready to 
return to sports activity if the index is 65 or less, according to general 
opinion. However, both qualification and disqualification are serious matters 
that cannot be left to the conclusions of one or two tests. Physicians are held 
accountable 
to 
their 
clinical 
judgments, 
not 
to 
test 
results. 
 
 
Surgical and Congenital Disorders  
Gross structural deformity, malfunction, traumatic or surgical loss of a major 
part, a history of extensive pathology, three concussions resulting in 
unconsciousness of 1 minute or longer, active hernia, or recurring injury of a 
part are considered by most authorities to be disqualifying in contact sports 
regardless of body compensation and even if approved by player, parents, 
family doctor, specialist, psychologist, and coach. The risks are far too great. 
At the same time, a noncontact sport may be approved. The possibility of a 
change in team position can also be considered. 
 
 
The postoperative athlete must be evaluated not as the average postoperative 
patient who is to return to a sedentary life-style but as one who will be 
subjected to forces far above those normally encountered. The extent of 
pathology and its complications, the extent of surgery and complications, 
and the type of incision are all variables that must be weighed. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 362 
 
In contact sports, a single eye, a limb loss, an un descended testis, or a 
unilateral renal dysfunction or malformation are usually considered reasons 
for automatic disqualification regardless of the outward health status of the 
functioning part. No athletic activity is worth the consequences of possible 
injury to a healthy part, although this point is controversial among many. 
Concern over a single ovary is not as great as the organ is well protected. 
Such conditions as recurring gleno humeral dislocations, acromio clavicular 
separations, and knee instability are usually considered disqualifying. Even 
with successful surgical repair, wires can break, screws can loosen, and 
plates can slide from severe stress. The physician's objective must be to 
avoid the risk of permanent impairment. 
 
Non disabling congenital defects are judged relative to the risk involved. For 
example, non symptomatic spondylolis thesis without spin a bifida features 
would not bar participation in a contact sport, but severe low-back 
symptoms may be reasons for disqualification even if overt signs are not 
evident. 
 
 
Respiratory Considerations  
Asthma must be judged on its degree and the sport involved, and some 
asthmatics receive relief of their bronchi spasm during exercise. No 
asthmatic dyspnea is usually related in the healthy to effort expended during 
vigorous exercise, and it may be especially noticeable in cold weather. Mild, 
occasional hemoptysis is normal with some athletes after strong exertion, but 
profuse or commonly bloody sputum demands a full investigation. 
 
 
 Cardiovascular Considerations 
The largest percentage of non traumatic deaths in sports can be attributed to 
ischemic heart disease, unsuspected preexisting cardiovascular anomalies, 
and infections having myocarditis in their repertoire. Occasionally, some 
conditions are first discovered by the sports physician such as aortic 
coarctation, asymptomatic atrial septal defects, dextrocardia, and rarely 
mitral insufficiency. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 363 
 
 
A finding of abnormal thrill, hum, pulse, blood pressure, murmur, or 
arrhythmia should be followed by simple exercise tests, and then 
reevaluated. Transient palpitations, tachycardia, cardiac flutters, and 
dizziness often cause diagnostic difficulties, and many ectopic arrhythmias 
disappear when the heart rate exceeds 140. Premature ventricular 
contractions are frequently noted by a team physician. These are often of 
minor concern and associated with emotional causes, gastrointestinal 
disturbances, and certain drugs (eg, caffeine). 
 
Heart Disorders  
A review of the literature reveals that there are wide differences in specific 
disqualifying criteria. Paroxysmal auricular tachycardia is strictly 
disqualifying for all competitive sports owing to the possibility of 
unpredictable fainting during stressful activity. This does not include the 
commonly 
witnessed 
psychogenic 
sinus 
tachycardia 
seen 
before 
competition. Many physicians feel that any significant heart enlargement is 
the basis for automatic sports exclusion. Compensated or repaired congenital 
cardiovascular defects must be evaluated on an individual basis according to 
cardiac reserve, and then only if a written clearance is obtained from the 
attending cardiologist.  
 
 
An abnormality within the cardiovascular system of a youth should not 
cause automatic exclusion from sports. The concept of the need for a strictly 
normal heart has been proven a fallacy. Records show a champion swimmer 
with cyanotic heart disease, a famous long-distance runner who had a large 
aortic aneurysm, an U.S. Olympic skier who participated with a piece of 
shrapnel imbedded between the pericardium and the pulmonary artery, and 
many similar situations. The goal is to recognize a disorder, evaluate it, and 
establish the necessary guidelines to decrease risk and prevent serious 
complications. 
 
 
Blood Pressure  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 364 
 
In healthy athletes, blood pressure will be found in a wide range of short 
duration. A systolic pressure of 140+ constantly held is considered 
abnormal, while pressures of short duration in youth of 150 and college 
students of 220 are sometimes recorded. Abnormal levels in the healthy 
return quickly within a normal range with relaxation. Of greater concern is a 
rise in diastolic pressure. Many authorities believe that a resting pressure 
over 88 points to kidney disease, a reason for disqualification. Boxing 
examiners have recorded pressures of 65/40, indicating that hypotension 
requires a redefinition in athletics. 
 
Renal Disorders 
During vigorous physical activity, five problems are commonly associated 
with 
kidney 
function: 
dehydration, 
athletic 
pseudo 
nephritis, 
hemoglobinuria, ephroptosis, and trauma. 
Dehydration  
Losses of up to 21% of plasma water have been demonstrated after 4 hours 
of running. During high temperatures and humidity, it is virtually impossible 
during prolonged exercise to replace fluids from sweat loss, even though it is 
important to try to keep pace. From 200-300 ml of fluid are suggested for 
every 15 minutes of strenuous activity. Athletes presenting symptoms of 
chronic dehydration (eg, fatigue, decreased sweating, high core temperature) 
require several quarts of fluid each day despite a lack of thirst.  
 
Sodium depletion, often accompanying dehydration, is rarely a problem in 
temperate climates under normal exercise conditions. It more often arises in 
very hot climates, with indoor sports, and where restrictive clothing causes 
increased perspiration. Typical features are thirst, headache, cramps, nausea, 
apathy, anorexia, sleepiness, postural giddiness, peripheral circulatory 
failure, and falling blood pressure. When ambient temperatures are known to 
be high, a slow-release sodium supplementation is sometimes used in 
maintaining electrolyte balance. Many authorities are against its use, 
however. 
 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 365 
 
 
 
 
 
Effect of exercise and training on cardiovascular system. 
Effect on Heart Rate: 
Exercise uses up a lot of energy, which the cells derive from oxidizing 
glucose. Both glucose and oxygen have to be delivered by the blood. This 
means that the heart has to work harder to pump more blood through the 
body. This means it has to beat faster in order to achieve a higher 
throughput, as described by this equation: 
 
Heart rate for a human being at rest is about 70 beats/min. During vigorous 
exercise, heart rate can increase dramatically (the rule of thumb given for 
maximal heart rate is 220 minus your age). This will result in an increase in 
blood flow. 
 The circulatory system responds to an increased need for blood by adjusting 
the width of the blood vessels, primarily the arterioles and venules. The 
dependence of vessel resistance on the radius of the tube is described by 
Poiseuille's law and is described in detail in the exhibit,  
As a complete system, the amount of blood that flows through the 
circulatory system is in terms of the pressure difference between the arteries 
and the veins times the quantity referred to as the total peripheral resistance. 
But what about at the local level? How much blood flows through an 
individual blood vessel? What are the quantities that affect the rate of blood 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 366 
 
flow? This exhibit discusses a physical relation known as Poiseuille's Law 
which partially answers this question. 
Poiseuille's Law relates the rate at which blood flows through a small blood 
vessel (Q) with the difference in blood pressure at the two ends (P), the 
radius (a) and the length (L) of the artery, and the viscosity (n) of the blood. 
The law is an algebraic equation, 
 
 
From the formula given there, we see that blood flow depends very 
sensitively on the width of the blood vessels, so that changing the radius 
slightly has a large impact on the flow of blood. 
The circulatory system exploits this property rather nicely; by constricting 
blood flow the organs that need less oxygen during exercise and widening 
the arterioles to the organs which need more. For instance, the brain may use 
up to 30% of total blood flow while you're doing your homework, but when 
you're at the gym less than 10% of total blood flow goes through it. On the 
other hand, muscles use less than 10% of blood flow when at rest, but can 
take up to 50% of it when they're working. This regulation is an essential 
mechanism for delivering oxygen and glucose to the tissues that need it 
most. 
The cardiovascular system serves five important functions during 
exercise: 
1) Delivers oxygen to working muscles 
 
2) Oxygenates blood by returning it to the lungs 
 
3) Transports heat (a by-product of activity) from the core to the skin 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 367 
 
 
4) Delivers nutrients and fuel to active tissues 
 
5) Transports hormones 
 
Exercise places an increased demand on the cardiovascular system. 
Oxygen demand by the muscles increases sharply. Metabolic processes 
speed up and more waste is created. More nutrients are used and body 
temperature rises. To perform as efficiently as possible the cardiovascular 
system must regulate these changes and meet the body‘s increasing 
demands. 
Below we will examine the acute or immediate response to exercise and 
also the long-term adaptations that take place in the cardiovascular system 
with repeated exercise. The most important aspects of the cardiovascular 
system to examine include: 
 Heart rate 
 Stroke volume 
 Cardiac output 
 Blood flow 
 Blood pressure 
 Blood 
Immediate Response of the Cardiovascular System to Exercise 
Heart Rate 
 
Resting heart rate averages 60 to 80 beats/min in healthy adults. In 
sedentary, middle aged individuals it may be as high as 100 beats/min. In 
elite endurance athletes heart rates as low as 28 to 40 beats/min have been 
recorded. 
Before exercise even begins heart rate increases in anticipation. This is 
known as the anticipatory response. It is mediated through the releases 
of a neurotransmitters called epinephrine and nor epinephrine also 
known as adrenaline and nor adrenaline. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 368 
 
After the initial anticipatory response, heart rate increases in direct 
proportion to exercise intensity until a maximum heart rate is reached. 
Maximum heart rate is estimated with the formula 220-age. But this is 
only an estimation, and not particularly accurate. The only direct method 
for determining maximum heart rate is to exercise at increasing intensities 
until a plateau in heart rate is found despite the increasing work rate. 
Although heart rate increases rapidly with the onset of activity, providing 
exercise intensity remains constant, heart rate will level off. This is 
known as steady-state heart rate where the demands of the active tissues 
can be adequately met by the cardiovascular system. However, there is an 
exception to this 
During prolonged steady-state exercise, particularly in a hot climate, a 
steady-state heart rate will gradually increase. This phenomenon is known 
as cardiac drift and is thought to occur due to increasing body 
temperature. 
 
 
Stroke Volume 
Stroke volume is the amount of blood ejected per beat from left ventricle 
and measured in ml/beat. 
Stroke volume increases proportionally with exercise intensity. In 
untrained individuals stroke volume at rest it averages 50-70ml/beat 
increasing up to 110-130ml/beat beat during intense, physical activity. In 
elite athletes resting stroke volume averages 90-110ml/beat increasing to 
as much as 150-220ml/beat. 
Stroke volume may increase only up to 40-60% of maximal capacity after 
which it plateaus. Beyond this relative exercise intensity, stroke volume 
remains unchanged right up until the point of exhaustion. But this is not 
conclusive and other studies suggest stroke volume continues to rise until 
the pint of exhaustion. 
Interestingly, swimmers see a smaller increase in stroke volume compared 
to runners or cyclists for example. It is believed that the supine position 
prevents blood from pooling in the lower extremities enhancing venous 
return. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 369 
 
Why does stroke volume increase with the onset of exercise? One 
explanation is that the left ventricle fills more completely, stretching it 
further, with the elastic recoil producing a more forceful contraction. This 
is known as the Frank-Starling mechanism. Other contributing factors 
include increased contractility of the ventricles and reduced peripheral 
resistance due to greater vasodilatation of the blood vessels. 
 
Cardiac Output 
 
Cardiac output is the amount of blood pumped by the heart in 1 minute 
measured in L/min. It is a product of stroke volume and heart rate (SV x 
HR). If either hearts rate or stroke volume increase, or both, cardiac 
output increases also. 
Cardiac output increases proportionally with exercise intensity - which is 
predictable from understanding the response of heart rate and stroke 
volume to activity. At rest the cardiac output is about 5L/min. During 
intense exercise this can increase to 20-40L/min. 
 
Blood Flow 
 
The vascular system can redistribute blood to those tissues with the 
greatest immediate demand and away from areas that have less demand 
for oxygen. 
At rest 15-20% of circulating blood supplies skeletal muscle. During 
vigorous exercise this increases to 80-85% of cardiac output. Blood is 
shunted away from major organs such as the kidneys, liver, stomach and 
intestines. It is then redirected to the skin to promote heat loss . 
Athletes are often advised not to eat several hours before training or 
competition. This is advice worth adhering to, as food in the stomach will 
lead to competition for blood flow between the digestive system and 
muscles. It has been shown that gastrointestinal blood flow during 
exercise shortly after a meal is greater compared to exercising on an 
empty stomach . 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 370 
 
Blood Pressure 
 
At rest, a typical systolic blood pressure in a healthy individual ranges 
from 110-140mmHg and 60-90mm hemotocrit .Hg for diastolic blood 
pressure. 
During exercise systolic pressure, the pressure during contraction of the 
heart (known as systole) can increase to over 200mmHg and levels as 
high as 250mmHg have been reported in highly trained, healthy athletes. 
Diastolic pressure on the other hand remains relatively unchanged 
regardless of exercise intensity. In fact an increase of more than 15 mm 
Hg as exercise intensity increases can indicate coronary heart disease and 
is used as marker for ceasing an exercise tolerance test. 
Both systolic and diastolic blood pressure can rise to high, albeit brief, 
levels during resistance exercise. Values of 480/350mmHg (9) have been 
reported to coincide with a Valsalva manoeuvre - i.e. trying to exhale 
against a closed mouth, nose and glottis. 
Blood 
During resting conditions the oxygen content of blood varies from about 
20ml of oxygen per 100ml of arterial blood to 14ml of oxygen per 100ml 
of venous blood (2). The difference in oxygen content of arterial and 
venous blood is known as a-vO2 difference.  
   As exercise intensity increase the a-vO2 difference increase also and at 
maximal exertion the difference between arterial and venous blood 
oxygen concentration can be three times that at a resting level.  
Blood plasma volume decreases with the onset of exercise. The increase 
in blood pressure and changes in intramuscular osmotic pressures force 
water from the vascular compartment to the interstitial space. During 
prolonged exercise, plasma volume can decrease by 10-20% and by 15-
20% in 1-minute bouts of exhaustive exercise (10). Resistance training 
with 40% and 70% one repetition maximum can cause a 7.7% and 13.9% 
reduction in blood plasma respectively (11). 
A reduction in plasma increases the concentration of hemoglobin. 
Although no extra red blood cells have been produced, the greater 
concentration of hemoglobin per unit of blood significantly increases the 
bloods oxygen carrying capacity. This is one of the main adaptations 
during immediate acclimatization to altitude. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 371 
 
Blood pH can change from a slightly alkaline 7.4 at rest to as low as 6.5 
during all-out sprinting activity. This is primarily due to an increased 
reliance on anaerobic energy systems and the accumulation or hydrogen 
ions (1). 
Effect of exercise and training on respiratory system. 
 
What is an increase in oxygen diffusion rate? 
 
Oxygen diffusion is where the oxygen moves from the capillaries to the 
tissues and carbon dioxide moves from the cells to the blood. Oxygen 
diffusion rate increases after long term exercise and as a result 
the oxygen and carbon dioxide will start to diffuse much quicker. 
 
How does exercise affect the heart rate? 
 
Like all muscles, the heart becomes stronger as a result of exercise, so it 
can pump more blood through the body with every beat and continue 
working at maximum level, if needed, with less strain. The resting heart rate 
of those who exercise is also slower, because less effort is needed to pump 
blood. 
 
Exercise or any physical activity has a special effect on respiratory system . 
We need oxygen at rest and during exercise , since energy supply to the 
active muscles increases demand of oxygen . Another important function of 
respiration is to eliminate carbon dioxide from the body. During exercise 
cellular oxidation increases and thereby carbon dioxide production increases. 
Respiratory system maintains an efficient balance between the oxygen and 
carbon dioxide in the blood at rest and also during exercise. There are some 
immediate changes that occur during exercise programme. Also, there are 
some relatively permanent changes following long-term physical training , 
the magnitude of changes being dependent on type , intensity and duration of 
exercise. 
Immediate changes during exercise :  
a)  Tidal Volume : The amount of air which we inhale or exhale during 
quiet breathing is called tidal volume. It is around 500 ml. During exercise , 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 372 
 
this tidal volume increases. Depending on intensity it may be 1500-2000 ml 
for ordinary person and for well trained athlete it may be increased to 2500 
ml.  
b)  Respiratory rate : Number of times one takes inspiration or expiration 
in each minute is called Respiratory rate. At rest , respiratory rate is around 
16 per minute. During exercise , for ordinary persons it may be increased to 
25-30 per minute and for well trained athlete it may be around 38-40 per 
minute.  
c) Pulmonary Ventilation : The amount of air which passes through lungs 
is each minute is called Pulmonary ventilation . The Pulmonary ventilation 
(PV) = Tidal volume (TV) X Respiratory rate (RR) and therefore at rest it is 
around 8 lit / min . During exercise since both TV and RR increases , PV 
will also increase depending on the intensity of exercise . For ordinary 
person , the value of PV may be 40-50 lit / min and for well trained athlete , 
it may be around 100 lit / min .  
d) Oxygen uptake : The amount of oxygen which we take inside the body 
from ambient air in each minute at rest is called resting oxygen uptake. It is 
around 200-300 ml / min . During exercise oxygen uptake increases to 3.5 lit 
/ min for ordinary person and 4.5 lit/min for well trained athlete.  
e) Lung diffusion capacity: Diffusion is the process of movement of gas 
molecules (O2 and CO2 ) that takes place in the lungs and tissues. During 
exercise there will be more movement of gas molecules and diffusion 
capacity increases.  
f) Lung volume: For normal breathing at rest lung expand and there is a 
change in air pressure. During exercise due to rapid movement of diaphragm 
and inter costal muscles total area of lung expands to accommodate more 
exchange of gases. 
Long-term effect of training on Respiratory system  
a) Tidal Volume (TV) : Trained athlete‘s capacity to inhale or exhale air 
during exercise increases to the tune of 2500 ml. Untrained persons cannot 
increase up to this level because their capacity is less than trained athletes.  

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 373 
 
b) Respiratory rate (RR): Trained athlete may increase their rate to 40 in 
each minute from 16 / min at rest. Untrained persons will not be able to 
reach to this level. They may increase their rate up to 25-28 / min.  
c) Pulmonary ventilation (PV): A trained athlete may increase PV to 
around 100 lit/min. This is because their TV and RR both increases during 
exercise. Untrained persons may increase it up to 50-60 lit/min. 
 d) Oxygen uptake: During exercise, after long term training, a trained 
athlete may consume around 5 liter oxygen per minute. Untrained persons 
may go up to the level of 3.5 lit oxygen per minute.  
e) Lung diffusion capacity: During exercise, the lung diffusion capacity 
increases in both trained and untrained persons. However, trained athletes 
may increase their diffusion capacity 30% more than that of an untrained 
person because athlete‘s lung surface area and red blood cell count is higher 
than that of the non-athletes.  
f) Vital capacity: It is the maximum volume of air forcefully expired after a 
maximal inspiration. For a healthy adult male it is around 4.8 lit and for 
women 3.1 lit. The athletes who are under training for a long period may 
increase vital capacity to around 6 lit.  
g) Efficiency of lung: An athlete‘s total efficiency of the lung remains at 
higher level than the non-athletes. This efficiency is the key factor for higher 
rate of oxygen uptake than non-athletes.  
h) Second wind: This term is usually described as a sudden transition from 
an ill-defined feeling of distress or fatigue during the early portions of 
prolonged exercise to a more comfortable, less stressful feeling later in 
exercise. It has been observed that trained athletes get their second wind 
comfortably and easily than non-athletes. 
The respiratory system comprises of the nose, mouth, throat, larynx, trachea, 
bronchi and lungs. The function of the respiratory system is to facilitate 
gaseous exchange to take place in the lungs and tissue cells of the body. 
Oxygen is required by cells in the body to allow various metabolic reactions 
to take place and to produce energy and is therefore essential to life. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 374 
 
The respiratory system may be defined as the organs and tissues through 
which air is passed into and out of the body to allow the necessary gaseous 
exchanges to take place. 
External respiration is the means by which oxygen from the air passes into 
the blood stream for transportation to the tissue cells and carbon dioxide is 
collected and transferred back to the lungs and expelled from the body. 
Internal respiration involves the vital chemical activities that take place in 
every living cell requiring oxygen and glycogen to combine and release 
energy, water and carbon dioxide. 
Organs of the respiratory system 
 
The normal rate of inspiration and expiration, the respiration rate, is about 
16 times a minute in an adult. Breathing is controlled by specialized centers 
in the brain stem, which automatically regulate the rate and depth of 
breathing depending on the level of carbon dioxide in the blood. 
A-VO2 diff 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 375 
 
Arterio-venous oxygen difference (A-VO2 diff) is the difference between 
oxygen concentration in the arteries and the oxygen concentration in the 
veins. 
Hemoglobin and Myoglobin 
Hemoglobin is a protein in red blood cells which enables the cells to carry 
oxygen and myoglobin is an oxygen-binding protein found in heart and 
skeletal muscles. 
Effect of exercise on the respiratory system 
In the Cardiovascular system, the benefits of exercise were discussed in 
relation to the improved functioning of the heart and the lowering of blood 
pressure. Combined with increased maximum oxygen consumption 
(VO2 max), or lung capacity, these are all vital contributors to being fit and 
healthy. 
An athlete who has not properly trained their cardiovascular system is likely 
to incur other injuries more easily by the rapid onset of fatigue and the 
consequent lowering of motivation and mental awareness. For anyone 
competing at varying altitudes, they must allow themselves a considerable 
period 
to 
acclimatize 
before 
an 
event. 
Even 
climbing 
to 
a 
moderate altitude decreases the maximum uptake by 7% to 8% due to the 
change in atmospheric pressure. This decrease in oxygen being supplied to 
the muscles may decrease performance by 4 to 8% depending on the 
duration of competition, a considerable disadvantage at the finish line.  Even 
the athlete who prepares and acclimatizes well may still not match natives of 
high altitude areas such as the Andes, who have a larger chest capacity, more 
alveoli, larger capillary beds and higher red blood cell count. Since people 
may suffer from altitude sickness when moving from low to high altitudes, 
sufficient time must also be allowed for these symptoms to disappear before 
starting intensive training. 
Effect of exercise and training on muscular system 
All muscles in the body, including those of the skeletal system and cardiac 
muscle, may benefit from regular exercise. Various involuntary systems and 
processes combine their effort to bring oxygenated blood to the working 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 376 
 
muscles. The result may be improved strength, a slimmer body and better 
overall health. 
There are three types of muscles, including skeletal, cardiac and smooth. 
Both skeletal muscles, which assist in locomotion and posture and cardiac, 
found in the heart, benefit from regular activity. Hypertrophy is an increase 
in skeletal muscle size, one of the most obvious effects of exercise on the 
muscular system, especially from resistance or strength training. Smooth 
muscle such as in the stomach and intestines is controlled by the autonomic 
nervous system and isn‘t affected. 
The body‘s muscular, cardiopulmonary, and nervous systems all respond to 
increased demand of the muscles for oxygenated blood. This gets diverted 
from non-vital organs to increase energy within the muscles. Byproducts 
from the increased activity such as lactic acid, hydrogen ions and carbon 
dioxide stimulate the respiratory system to increase breathing for better 
oxygen exchange. 
Effects of exercise on the muscular system show up in cardiac muscle too. A 
strong heart can pump more blood each time it beats, carrying nutrients and 
oxygen to all parts of the body. The pulse rate of a person who exercises 
regularly will be slower than most people, because the heart doesn‘t need to 
pump as much to move the same amount of blood. Steady aerobic exercise 
using the major muscle groups, enough to cause an obvious increase 
in respiration, is best for continued cardiac health. 
Two interesting effects of exercise on the muscular system are the decrease 
of inhibitory neural feedback and synchronous activation. The first process 
means the nervous system lets the muscle work longer and harder than it 
would if the muscle were untrained, where it might be injured. Synchronous 
activation allows more muscle fibers to work in tandem, giving the muscle 
an enhanced ability to handle the increased activity and perform at a higher 
level. The result is a measurable strength gain, particularly in women‘s 
muscles and those of adolescents. In addition, strength training with weights 
and resistance bands can reverse muscular decline that comes with aging. 
Warming up and cooling down can be vitally important to a proper workout. 
These may prevent adverse effects of exercise on the muscular system like 
strain injuries resulting from a lack of good preparation. The muscles need 
adequate blood and oxygen flow to begin vigorous activity. Stretching after 
the workout keeps them from tightening up and also keeps them flexible 
long after the workout is finished. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 377 
 
Weight-bearing exercises also contribute to bone density, a primary concern 
especially for women, who are more prone to osteoporosis. Tension on 
muscles improves strength and balance, which when combined with higher 
bone density makes fall injuries less likely. Strong, conditioned muscles at 
rest burn more calories than weak muscles. Regular exercise also helps 
prevent obesity, a major cause of health problems at any age. 
 
Hypertrophy – the muscle increases in size and bulk. Hypertrophy is a result 
of an increase in the volume of contractile proteins (Actin & Myosin) within  
the muscle cell so they can contract with  greater force.  The number of 
muscle fibers stays the same.  In general males have a greater potential for 
increases in muscle bulk due to higher levels of the hormone testosterone.  
Increases in tendon strength - tendons are tough bands of fibrous connective 
tissue designed to withstand tension forces along their length. Like muscles, 
tendons adapt to the mechanical loading of regular exercise. A general 
adaptation is increased strength but different types of training will exert 
differing effects on muscle – tendon complexes.   Ligaments and tendons 
will increase in flexibility and strength with exercise. Articular cartilage also 
becomes thicker. 
Muscle stores & Mitochondria - Muscles increase their oxidative capacity 
(their ability to use oxygen to produce energy) with regular  training. This is 
achieved by an increase in the number of mitochondria (an  
organelle where aerobic energy is produced) within the muscle cells which 
will increase the supply of ATP and an increase in the quantity of enzymes 
involved  in the production of ATP. The ability of the muscle to store 
myoglobin is increased (myoglobin is like hemoglobin and carries oxygen). 
Lactic acid anaerobic training stimulates the muscles to become better able 
to tolerate lactic acid and clear it away more efficiently. With endurance 
training the capillary network extends allowing greater volumes of blood to 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 378 
 
supply the muscles with oxygen and nutrients. The muscles are able to use 
more fate as a fuel source and become more efficient at using oxygen. 
Exercise has both short and long term effects to muscular system. 
Exercise works as a stimulus and gives stress to muscles. 
After exercise you may feel short term effects like: 
 Blood flow because of increased volume of blood that is pumped to 
muscle tissue. 
 Muscle fatigue is short-term decline in the ability of a muscle to 
generate force. Another way to describe muscle fatigue is as the short-
term inability to continue to repeat muscular contractions with the same 
force. 
 Muscle exhaustion when exercise continues through muscle fatigue 
without rest after time it can lead to muscle exhaustion. 
 Muscle damage often happens, because of over-stretching without a 
proper warming-up or no warming-up before intense exercise. 
 Cramp uncontrollable and very painful muscle contraction. 
After some time passes then long term effects on muscles takes place 
like: 
 
 Muscle size increases mainly due to muscle ability to adapt to stress 
over a period of time which increases them in size. 
 Muscle coordination increases when doing exercises which require 
skill and technique e.g.: dribbling ball. 
 Blood supply to muscles increases due to long-term exercise by that 
improving delivery of various nutrients, minerals and vitamins to 
muscles and making them more effective and faster at regenerating 
after injury or workout. 
Short term effects such as: 
 Blood flow – after exercise you can notice that muscle tissue (warm 
muscle) is bigger than cold muscle, because of blood flow into them. It 
can increase by up to 25 times, because muscle requires more energy 
and oxygen. 
 Muscle fatigue – is the decline in ability of a muscle to generate force. 
It can be a result of intense exercise, but abnormal fatigue may be 
caused by barriers to or interference with the different stages of muscle 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 379 
 
contraction. There are two main causes of muscle fatigue. The 
limitations of a nerve‘s ability to generate a sustained signal (neural 
fatigue) and the reduced ability of the muscle fiber to contract 
(metabolic fatigue). 
 Muscle exhaustion – general exhaustion often occurs after you have 
done too much activity at one time, such as by taking an extra-long 
hike. You may feel weak and tired, or your muscles may be sore. These 
sensations usually go away within a few days. In rare cases, 
generalized muscle weakness may be caused by another health 
problem, such as problems with body regulating the distribution of 
energy to muscles and organs. 
 Muscle damage – any effort beyond muscle ability level or accident 
can tear the fibers and cause muscle damage. When muscle fibers are 
damaged, the body immediately starts to repair it at the cellular level. 
Muscles most of the time repairs by themselves (if body is functioning 
properly) through time. If damage or injury is critical, surgery might be 
needed. 
 Cramp – because of over-exercise, lack of nutrients like magnesium or 
bad blood circulation when muscles don‘t receive enough oxygen. It is 
very painful and can be dangerous if doing exercise that involves heavy 
weights alone. 
  
Long-term effects of exercise 
 Muscle size – is mostly determined by persons genetics, but can be 
affected with life choices like: anabolic steroids, exercise, and healthy 
food. Exercising specific muscles regularly can increase their size by 
up to 60%. This increase in muscle size is mainly due to increased 
diameter of individual muscle fibres. 
 Muscle coordination – It trains muscles to work more efficient and 
effectively by working together. E.g.: when the prime mover contracts 
more rapidly the antagonist (muscle) must also relax as quickly to 
prevent blocking the movement. 
 Blood supply – As a result of frequent exercise over a sustained period 
of time both the quantity of blood vessels and the extent of the 
capillary beds increases. 
Effects of exercise on muscular system would benefit by increasing size and 
number of mitochondria, improved perception of muscle tone and also 
overall improved: 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 380 
 
 Coordination 
 Power 
 Balance 
 Speed 
 Agility 
 Body composition 
 Reaction time 
 Muscular endurance 
 Flexibility 
Physiological concept of physical fitness,  
Warming up, Conditioning and fatigue. 
Introduction 
The formal dance class has long been considered the cornerstone of training, 
providing all the technical, physical and aesthetic requirements of dance. In 
recent years a considerable amount of research has been carried out 
regarding the health of dancers. Findings from this research indicate that 
many dancers are not as fit and healthy as they could be. It has also been 
found that there is a discrepancy in the physical intensity level between 
training, rehearsal, and performance. This means that training methods, 
which are generally based on tradition, are not sufficient to help prepare 
dancers for the higher, more physically demanding aspects of performance. 
In light of these studies, and with increased understanding of the artistic and 
athletic needs of dancers in different genres, it is no longer acceptable to 
train dancers without preparing them physiologically for the demands of 
current choreographic work. 
 
What is Fitness, and why is it Beneficial? 
For dancers, the whole body (physical and psychological) is their 
instrument, their means of artistic expression. Dance calls upon all aspects of 
fitness. Good fitness is key to reducing the risk of injury, enhancing 
performance, and ensuring longer dancing careers. A healthy dancer is one 
who is in a state of being ‗well‘ in both body and mind. A physically fit 
dancer is one who has the ability to meet the demands of a specific physical 
task at an optimal level. The goal of improving dancers‘ fitness is to 
minimize the difference between the dancer‘s individual maximal abilities 
and their performance requirements, so that they can become the best dancer 
possible. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 381 
 
What Types of Fitness Are Most Important for a Dancer and Why? 
 
While research indicates that some dance styles require certain elements of 
fitness more explicitly than others, in a well-rounded dance training 
program, it is necessary to consider all the components of fitness.  
 
The components of fitness are: 
 Aerobic fitness – associated with moderate, longer-term levels of activity. 
 Anaerobic fitness – associated with high intensity, maximal, short bursts of 
activity. 
 Muscle endurance – the ability of a muscle to produce continuous 
movement. 
 Strength – the ability of a muscle to produce a maximal force on one 
occasion. 
 Power – the explosive (speed-related) aspect of strength. 
 Flexibility – the range of motion at a joint in association with the pliability 
of a muscle. 
 Neuromuscular 
coordination – 
associated 
with 
balance, 
agility, 
coordination and skill. 
 Body composition – the make-up of body weight by percentage of muscle 
and fat. 
 Rest – a period of no activity, to allow for recovery and regeneration. 
While any change in traditional dance training regimens must be approached 
cautiously to ensure that enhanced artistry and expression remain the 
primary goals, it may be suggested that unless dancers are physiologically 
honed to the same extent as they are artistically, their physical conditioning 
may potentially be the limiting factor in their development. Ignoring the 
physiological training of today‘s dancers could eventually hamper the 
development of the art form. It is the continual responsibility of dance 
teachers and educators to develop their knowledge and understanding of the 
physiological demands of dance, and be aware of the options for either 
integrating physical fitness training into the technique class itself or 
providing it through supplementation. 
In a recent study, full time contemporary dance students completed a year of 
weekly dance fitness classes alongside their regular technique training. 
Students perceived positive physiological adaptations such as reductions in 
fatigue, improvement in general energy levels and an improved capacity in 
their dance classes to sustain technique and jumping ability. The importance 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 382 
 
of warm up and cool down was also commonly cited and the recognition of 
the relationship between fitness and injury prevention was highlighted. 
More than twenty years ago it was stated that the best dancers have an 
integrated combination of two talents: knowledge of what is to be expressed 
and the physical and mental tools to accomplish that expression. A dancer 
who is able to jump higher, balance longer and create illusions such as 
floating may not necessarily be a better dancer, but she does have the 
advantage of a greater range of tools with which to produce the desired 
images of dance choreography. Although a topic of continual debate, more 
recent research has since indicated that a fitter dancer is a better dancer. 
 
Which Activities Improve Various Types of Fitness? 
 
Aerobic Training 
 
The greater a dancer‘s aerobic capacity, the longer they can work at 
moderate heart rates before becoming fatigued. Research suggests that dance 
will only elicit an improvement in aerobic capacity in a very unfit group of 
people, or if an aerobic dance class is taken. The average dance technique 
class is too intermittent in nature for any positive aerobic effect to occur. In 
order to improve aerobic capacity, the body needs to work hard enough to 
bring about change or adaptation within the body. Specifically, a rise in 
heart rate to approximately 70 – 90% of maximum (HRmax) will stress the 
aerobic energy system. This elevation in heart rate has to be maintained 
between 20 and 40 minutes, three times a week. Continuous movement 
activities, such as running, aerobics classes, swimming, cycling, and 
skipping, are good examples of aerobic exercise. 
Although there are variations among teachers, a primary intention of the 
technique class is dance skill acquisition. Developing high levels of 
technical skill and movement economy requires a different focus from 
developing the aerobic capacity of the dancer. However, technique classes 
can be modified to involve some degree of aerobic work, using simple 
repetitive movements. Simple movement repetition helps to stress the 
aerobic energy system rather than stress skill acquisition. Warm up could be 
conducted in a continuous manner at a higher intensity than normal, and 
center or traveling sequences could be longer, with less rest time, allowing 
an aerobic foundation to develop. Familiar movement combinations might 
be performed over consecutive classes, purely for the benefit of continuous 
repetition rather than artistic effect. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 383 
 
 
Anaerobic Training 
 
Anaerobic training utilizes activity that is of a maximal, ‗all-out‘ effort for 
short periods of time. An exercise-to-rest ratio of 1:3 is recommended for 
training the threshold at which lactate starts to accumulate in the blood 
stream, thus hindering muscle function. An exercise-to-rest ratio of 1:5 is 
recommended for training the source of the fastest muscle actions: high 
energy phosphates, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and creatine phosphate 
(CP). Optimum exercise time for each bout can gradually increase from 10 – 
50 seconds. The intensity of activity for the whole duration should be near 
maximal heart rate (95 – 100% HRmax). Rest periods should be at a low 
intensity exercise, as this promotes faster recovery. Examples of anaerobic 
exercises include sprints, quick steps, jumps, and fast skipping. 
 
Strength/Endurance Training 
 
The role of strength training in dance has frequently been misunderstood. 
There are still concerns in the dance world that increased muscle strength 
will negatively affect flexibility and aesthetic appearance. However, 
research has demonstrated that supplemental strength training can lead to 
better dancing and reduced occurrences of dance injuries, without interfering 
with key artistic and aesthetic requirements. 
For an optimal strength training program, it has been suggested that 
exercises be specific to the desired outcome. Strength training can involve 
very heavy weights/resistance with minimal repetitions for a relatively short 
amount of time, or exercises can involve light weights/resistance with many 
repetitions for a prolonged time. Each program targets a specific goal. A 
combination of high intensities (70 – 100% of maximum) and low volumes 
of work, two to three times a week, aims to increase muscle strength. A full 
recovery period (5 – 6 minutes) is essential between sets in this instance. 
Dancers wanting to increase muscle endurance are prescribed a combination 
of moderate intensities (60 – 70% maximum) and high volumes of work, 
three to four times a week. The rest periods are then shorter (2 – 4 minutes) 
so that the next set of exercises begins before full recovery. 
 
Power Training 
 
Jumping is an integral part of most dance performances and involves the use 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 384 
 
of both muscular strength and elasticity. Studies report that polymeric 
(jump) training has been shown to have a positive effect in dancers. 
However, there are warnings that polymeric training must be approached 
gradually and systematically to avoid injury. A good starting point is to 
design exercises in which dancers are encouraged to jump in a neutral 
position without emphasizing artistic skill, but instead simply focusing on 
jumping higher. Once the dancers have gained greater understanding of how 
to elevate themselves, they can bring correct dance technique back into the 
movements while trying to maintain as much height as possible. 
 
Flexibility Training 
 
Flexibility is an important element of physical fitness. It is crucial in 
complimenting muscular strength, building efficiency in movement, 
coordination, and preventing injuries. Holding muscles in a stretched 
position for a prolonged amount of time causes the muscle fibers to become 
accustomed to the new length, therefore increasing flexibility. For it to be 
beneficial, the specific muscle group being stretched needs to be isolated. 
For example, when stretching the hamstrings, spinal movement should be 
reduced. Relaxation is also important. It is advised that stretches happen 
slowly and gently with coordinated inhalation and exhalation at the moment 
of maximum stretch (i.e., refrain from holding the breath). 
There are many different types of stretching including static (holding), 
dynamic (moving through the stretch), and proprioceptive neuromuscular 
facilitation (PNF; a method utilizing alternate contraction and relaxation). It 
is important to be aware of the advantages and disadvantages of each. For 
example, ballistic (bouncing) stretches are not considered useful and can 
lead to muscle soreness and injury. Contrary to the practice of many dancers, 
stretching to full range should be carried out when the body is warm, 
preferably after class. 
Neuromuscular Coordination 
 
Moving beyond the purely physiological parameters, dance fitness also 
involves balance, agility, coordination and skill. Out of all the components 
of fitness, it is likely that neuromuscular coordination is addressed most 
often in the actual dance technique class. Through the use of imagery and 
visualization, improved neural pathways can help facilitate and develop 
efficiency in movement. Neuromuscular coordination can positively affect 
levels of muscle strength by controlling the recruitment of the right number 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 385 
 
of muscle fibers at the right time. In others words, dancers can become more 
skillful in recruiting only the muscles required to produce a certain 
movement and thus sustain sufficient energy levels and reduce fatigue. 
Research into motor control and motor learning also offers invaluable 
information that can enhance neural re-patterning, coordination and muscle 
relaxation. 
Body Composition 
 
Body composition plays an important role in dancers‘ health. Appropriate 
and healthy ratios of lean muscle mass to fat mass are key factors that can 
contribute to optimizing physical performance. Body composition is often 
expressed as a percentage of body fat and healthy recommendations suggest 
that dancers‘ body fat be at a certain level in order reach their potential. 
According to the World Health Organization, healthy body compositions 
range from 17 to 25% for females and below 15% for males (but not too low 
as a certain amount of fat is essential for daily healthy function). Optimal 
body composition is going to vary from activity to activity. These 
measurements are useful to determine what the best make-up is for dancers 
so that they can jump higher, turn faster, and physically survive long days of 
training, rehearsing, and performing. A balance of appropriate energy intake 
(nutrition) and energy expenditure (physical activity) will help dancers 
achieve the body composition that is right for them. 
Rest 
The importance of rest in dance training cannot be stressed enough. Proper 
recovery from physical training has many benefits. Rest helps to accelerate 
muscle regeneration between training sessions, to decrease fatigue, and to 
decrease the incidence of injury. It has been appreciated relatively recently 
that continuous training beyond a certain threshold of physical activity, 
without sufficient rest, can negatively impact both the health and 
performance of dancers. This concept refers to overtraining – excessive 
training that results in no effect or even negative effects on a dancer‘s 
performance. When there is an imbalance between habitual exertion 
(training) and recovery, symptoms such as severe and prolonged fatigue, 
changes in behavior and a loss of motivation can result. Recommendations 
to prevent or reverse overtraining include monitoring dance quality versus 
quantity, diet, hydration, rest, and sleep patterns. 
General Training Principles 
The following variables of exercise training also need to be understood in 
constructing balanced training plans. Depending on the dancer‘s 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 386 
 
training/performance goal, it is often necessary to progress to a higher level 
of difficulty by increasing the intensity, volume and/or frequency of training 
over time. Otherwise, the body simply adapts to the training and fitness 
levels plateau. Also fundamental to training is the concept of overload, 
which means that the body must be challenged above a certain threshold to 
provide sufficient stimulus for improvement to occur. Normally encountered 
stress will maintain but not increase the level of conditioning. For example, 
if the demands of a dance class are too similar from day to day there will be 
insufficient overload for desired improvement to take place. Sport literature 
describes another principle called specificity, and recommends that to 
develop motor abilities; training exercises should use similar technical 
patterns and kinematic structure to the particular activity for which it is 
preparing the athlete/dancer. 
 
What is Physical Fitness? 
 
Physical fitness is an important concept as related to the fields of physiology 
and exercise physiology. You should take a few minutes and read this brief 
history of Fitness. You'll note that this fitness idea is not something that just 
recently burst onto the scene. 
 
There are a number of definitions for physical fitness but I developed the 
following general definition many years ago: 
Physical fitness is the relative state of optimal function. All humans are able to 
be active because of the physiology / function of multiple body systems. Each 
of us has an optimal function which is unique to us and based largely on genetic 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 387 
 
endowment. We can improve that function by systematically engaging in 
various activities. The term relative is comparative in nature and so we may 
be more or less fit than we were or more or less fit than others with similar 
genetic endowment. 
 
 
Other definitions of physical fitness include the following: 
 If you are physically fit, you are free from illness, and able to function 
efficiently and effectively, to enjoy leisure, and to cope with 
emergencies. Health-related components of physical fitness include body 
composition, cardiovascular fitness, flexibility, muscular endurance, and 
muscle strength. Skill-related components include agility, balance, 
coordination, power, reaction time, and speed. 
 Physical fitness comprises two related concepts: general fitness (a state 
of health and well-being) and specific fitness (a task-oriented definition 
based on the ability to perform specific aspects of sports or occupations). 
Physical fitness is generally achieved through exercise, correct nutrition 
and enough rest. It is an important part of life. 
 The state or condition of being fit; suitability or appropriateness. Good 
health or physical condition, especially as the result of exercise and 
proper nutrition. 
When considering physical fitness we usually consider it as having two 
components, health related fitness and skill related fitness.  
As a physical education professional you will be responsible for knowing these 
concepts and later, for being able to describe how would one would exercise 
or train in such a way as to improve any of these components. 
Types of physical fitness 
Physical fitness is a general concept and is defined in many ways by different 
scientists. Physical fitness is discussed here in two major categories: health-
related physical fitness and motor-performance physical fitness. Despite some 
overlap between these classifications, there are major differences, as described 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 388 
 
below. 
Health-related physical fitness 
Health-related physical fitness is defined as fitness related to some aspect of 
health. This type of physical fitness is primarily influenced by an individual‘s 
exercise habits; thus, it is a dynamic state and may change. Physical 
characteristics that constitute health-related physical fitness include strength 
and endurance of skeletal muscles, joint flexibility, body composition, and 
cardio respiratory endurance. All these attributes change in response to 
appropriate physical conditioning programs, and all are related to health. 
 
Strength and endurance of skeletal muscles of the trunk help maintain correct 
posture and prevent such problems as low back pain. Minimal levels of 
muscular strength and endurance are needed for routine tasks of living, such as 
carrying bags of groceries or picking up a young child. Individuals with very 
low levels of muscular strength and endurance are limited in the performance 
of routine tasks and have to lead a restricted life. Such limitations are perhaps 
only indirectly related to health, but individuals who cannot pick up and hug a 
grandchild or must struggle to get up from a soft chair surely have a lower 
quality of life than that enjoyed by their fitter peers. 
 
Flexibility, or range of motion around the joints, also ranks as an important 
component of health-related fitness. Lack of flexibility in the lower back and 
posterior thigh is thought to contribute to low back pain. Extreme lack of 
flexibility also has a deleterious effect on the quality of life by limiting 
performance. 
Body composition refers to the ratio between fat and lean tissue in the body. 
Excess 
body 
fat 
is 
clearly 
related 
to 
several 
health 
problems, 
including cardiovascular disease, type II (adult-onset) diabetes mellitus, and 
certain forms of cancer. Body composition is affected by diet, but exercise 
habits play a crucial role in preventing obesity and maintaining acceptable 
levels of body fat. 
 
Cardio respiratory endurance, or aerobic fitness, is probably what most people 
identify as physical fitness. Aerobic fitness refers to the integrated functional 
capacity of the heart, lungs, vascular system, and skeletal muscles to expend 
energy. The basic activity that underlies this type of fitness is aerobic 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 389 
 
metabolism in the muscle cell, a process in which oxygen is combined with a 
fuel source (fats or carbohydrates) to release energy and produce carbon 
dioxide and water. The energy is used by the muscle to contract, thereby 
exerting force that can be used for movement. For the aerobic reaction to take 
place, the cardio respiratory system (i.e., the circulatory and pulmonary 
systems) must constantly supply oxygen and fuel to the muscle cell and remove 
carbon dioxide from it. The maximal rate at which aerobic metabolism can 
occur is thus determined by the functional capacity of the cardio respiratory 
system and is measured in the laboratory as maximal oxygen intake. As will be 
discussed in detail below, aerobic fitness is inversely related to the incidence 
of coronary heart disease and hypertension. 
Motor-performance physical fitness 
Motor-performance fitness is defined as the ability of the neuromuscular 
system to perform specific tasks. Test items used to assess motor-performance 
fitness include chin-ups, sit-ups, the 50-yard dash, the standing long jump, and 
the shuttle run (a timed run in which the participant dashes back and forth 
between two points). The primary physical characteristics measured by these 
tests are the strength and endurance of the skeletal muscles and the speed or 
power of the legs. These traits are important for success in many types 
of athletics. Muscular strength and endurance are also related to some aspects 
of health, as stated above. 
There is disagreement among experts about the relative importance of health-
related and motor-performance physical fitness. While both types of fitness are 
obviously desirable, their relative values should be determined by an 
individual‘s personal fitness objectives. If success in athletic events is of 
primary importance, motor-performance fitness should be emphasized. If 
concern about health is paramount, health-related fitness should be the focus. 
Different types of fitness may be important not only to different individuals but 
also to the same individual at different times. The 16-year-old competing on a 
school athletic team is likely to focus on motor performance. The typical 
middle-aged individual is not as likely to be concerned about athletic success, 
emphasizing instead health and appearance. One further point should be made: 
to a great extent, motor-performance physical fitness is determined by genetic 
potential. The person who can run fast at 10 years of age will be fast at age 17; 
although training may enhance racing performance, it will not appreciably 
change the individual‘s genetically determined running speed. On the other 
hand, characteristics of health-related physical fitness, while also partly 
determined by inheritance, are much more profoundly influenced by exercise 
habits. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 390 
 
 
Principles of exercise training 
Research in exercise training has led to the recognition of a number of general 
principles of conditioning. These principles must be applied to the development 
of a successful exercise program. 
Specificity 
The principle of specificity derives from the observation that the adaptation of 
the body or change in physical fitness is specific to the type of training 
undertaken. Quite simply this means that if a fitness objective is to increase 
flexibility, then flexibility training must be used. If one desires to develop 
strength, resistance or strengthening exercises must be employed. This principle 
is indeed simple; however, it is frequently ignored. Many fraudulent claims for 
an exercise product or system promise overall physical fitness from one simple 
training technique. A person should be suspicious of such claims and should 
consider whether or not the exercise training recommended is the type that will 
produce the specific changes desired. 
Overload 
Overload, the second important principle, means that to improve any aspect of 
physical fitness the individual must continually increase the demands placed on 
the appropriate body systems. For example, to develop strength, progressively 
heavier objects must be lifted. Overload in running programs is achieved by 
running longer distances or by increasing the speed. 
Progression 
Individuals frequently make the mistake of attempting too rapid a fitness 
change. A classic example is that of the middle-aged man or woman who has 
done no exercise for 20 years and suddenly begins a vigorous training program. 
The result of such activity is frequently an injury or, at the least, stiffness and 
soreness. There are no hard-and-fast rules on how rapidly one should progress 
to a higher level of activity. The individual‘s subjective impression of whether 
or not the body seems to be able to tolerate increased training serves as a good 
guide. In general it might be reasonable not to progress to higher levels of 
activity more often than every one or two weeks. 
Warm-up/cool down 
Another important practice to follow in an exercise program is to gradually 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 391 
 
start the exercise session and gradually taper off at the end. The warm-up 
allows various body systems to adjust to increased metabolic demands. The 
heart rate increases, blood flow increases, and muscle temperatures rise. 
Warming up is certainly a more comfortable way to begin an exercise session 
and is probably safer. Progressively more vigorous exercises or a gradual 
increase in walking speed are good ways to warm up. It is equally important 
to cool down—that is, to gradually reduce exercise intensity—at the end of 
each session. The abrupt cessation of vigorous exercise may cause blood to 
pool in the legs, which can cause fainting or, more seriously, can sometimes 
precipitate cardiac complications. Slow walking and stretching for five minutes 
at the end of an exercise session is therefore a good practice. The heart rate 
should gradually decline during the cool down, and by the end of the five 
minutes it should be less than 120 beats per minute for individuals under 50 
years of age and less than 100 beats per minute for those over 50. 
Frequency, intensity, and duration 
To provide guidance on how much exercise an individual should do, exercise 
physiologists have developed equations based on research. It is generally 
agreed that to develop and maintain physical fitness, the exercise must be 
performed on a regular basis. A frequency of about every other day or three 
days per week appears minimally sufficient. Many individuals exercise more 
frequently than this, and, of course, such additional exercise is acceptable 
provided that one does not become over trained and suffer illness or injury. 
The intensity of exercise required to produce benefits has been the subject of 
much study. Many people have the impression that exercise is not doing any 
good unless it hurts. This is simply not true. Regular exercise at 45 to 50 
percent of one‘s maximal capacity is adequate to improve one‘s physiological 
functioning and overall health. This level of intensity is generally comfortable 
for most individuals. A reliable way to gauge exercise intensity is to measure 
the heart rate during exercise. An exercise heart rate that is 65 percent of a 
person‘s maximal heart rate corresponds to approximately 50 percent of his 
maximal capacity. Maximal heart rate can be estimated by subtracting one‘s 
age in years from 220 (or, in the case of active males, by subtracting half of 
one‘s age from 205). Thus, a sedentary 40-year-old man has an estimated 
maximal heart rate of 180 beats per minute. Sixty-five percent of this maximal 
rate is 117 beats per minute; thus by exercising at 117 beats per minute, this 
individual is working at about 50 percent of his maximal capacity. To 
determine exercising heart rate, a person should exercise for several minutes, to 
allow the heart rate to adjust. The exerciser should then stop exercising, quickly 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 392 
 
find the pulse, and count the number of beats for 15 seconds. Multiplying this 
by four gives the rate in beats per minute. The pulse must be taken immediately 
after stopping exercise, since the heart rate rapidly begins to return to the 
resting level after work has been stopped. As noted above, exercising at the 50 
percent level of intensity will improve physiologic functioning and provide 
health benefits. This level of exercise will not produce the maximum fitness 
needed for competitive athletics. 
Overall conditioning 
Much emphasis has been given in the foregoing discussion to aerobic fitness, 
because this form of conditioning is extremely important. It should be noted, 
however, that other types of conditioning also have benefits. A total exercise 
program should include strengthening exercises, to maintain body mass and 
appropriate levels of strength for daily functioning, and stretching exercises to 
maintain joint mobility and flexibility. The specificity principle described 
above indicates that no one exercise is likely to produce the overall 
conditioning effect. In general an exercise plan should consist of aerobics, 
exercises that increase the strength and endurance of various skeletal muscle 
groups, and flexibility exercises to maintain good joint function. 
 
Individual differences 
 
The principles of exercise training discussed above should be viewed as general 
guidelines. Individuals differ in both physiological and psychological 
adaptations to exercise. Two people who are similar in many respects and who 
start the same exercise program may have entirely different impressions of it. 
One person may feel that the exercise is too easy, while the other may believe 
that it is much too hard. It is certainly appropriate that the exercise plan be 
adjusted to account for preferences. Likewise some individuals will progress to 
more intense training levels far more rapidly than others do. As mentioned 
earlier, exercise progress should be adjusted according to the exerciser‘s own 
assessment. 
Individuals also differ in the type of exercise they like or can tolerate. Jogging, 
for instance, is not for everyone. Many people who dislike jogging, or who 
suffer running injuries, can find other satisfactory exercise activities, such as 
cycling, walking, swimming, or participating in a sport. Many kinds of exercise 
activities are appropriate and can provide physiological and health benefits to 
the participant. There is no one best exercise. The important thing is to be 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 393 
 
regular in exercise participation and to follow the general guidelines outlined in 
this section. 
 
Physiological effects of exercise 
 
Neuromuscular effects 
 
STRENGTH AND ENDURANCE 
 
Appropriate exercise increases the strength and endurance of skeletal muscles. 
Increases in muscular strength are associated with increases in muscle mass; 
increases in muscular endurance are associated with improved blood flow to the 
working muscles. These results are achieved by resistance training. Any 
exercise that causes the muscle to increase its tension, whether or not the 
muscle actually shortens during contraction, provides an appropriate strength-
training stimulus. Resistance can be applied to a muscle group by attempting to 
move an immovable object, by working one muscle group against another, by 
lifting heavy weights, or by using special strength-training machines and 
devices. There is a wide selection of strength-training equipment that, when 
used properly, can increase muscular strength and endurance. It is possible that 
some of the equipment is more efficient in developing maximal performance, 
which is important for competitive athletes. But for the average individual, who 
is training to maintain an acceptable level of muscular fitness, any one device 
or program is probably about as good as another. 
Strength and endurance training is done by performing several ―reps‖ 
(repetitions) of a given exercise, then moving on to another exercise for a 
different muscle group. Experts generally recommend that exercisers select a 
resistance that is approximately 65 percent of the maximum they can lift for 
that particular exercise. This load should allow the completion of 12 reps of 
that exercise in 24 to 30 seconds. Each group of eight to 12 reps is called a set, 
and two or three sets of a given exercise are recommended for each training 
session. The average individual should perform strength and endurance training 
two to three days per week. Super circuit weight training refers to a program in 
which running or other aerobic exercises are performed between sets; this 
training produces aerobic as well as strength benefits. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 394 
 
FLEXIBILITY 
 
Muscles and tendons can be stretched to improve flexibility (the range of 
motion at a joint). Flexibility training follows a few, simple principles. To 
improve range of motion, the muscles and other connective tissue around a 
joint must be stretched. The preferred stretching technique is a slow increase in 
the range of motion. The exerciser should feel the muscle stretch, but not to the 
point of pain. The stretch should be performed gradually, and the body should 
be held for 10 to 20 seconds in the stretched position and then gradually 
returned to a relaxed posture. By stretching each muscle group in this fashion 
as a part of the strengthening and conditioning program, the participant will 
maintain good flexibility. Bouncing or explosive stretching movements should 
be avoided, as they can result in muscle or tendon tears. 
 
Cardio respiratory effects 
 
CARDIAC EFFECTS 
 
Regular aerobic exercise training has a direct effect on the heart muscle. The 
muscle mass of the left ventricle, which is the pumping chamber that circulates 
blood throughout the body, increases with exercise training. This change means 
that the heart can pump more blood with each beat. In short, the heart becomes 
a bigger, stronger, and more efficient pump capable of doing more work with 
less effort. 
 
CIRCULATORY EFFECTS 
 
Regular exercise also produces changes in the circulation. As previously 
discussed, muscle endurance training serves to increase blood flow to the 
working muscles. This increased blood flow means that more oxygen and fuel 
can be delivered to the muscle cells. The number of red blood cells, which 
carry oxygen in the blood, also increases with training, as does blood volume. 
Taken together, these changes indicate a greater capacity to transport oxygen to 
the working muscles. 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 395 
 
PULMONARY EFFECTS 
 
The basic function of the lungs is to facilitate the transfer (1) of oxygen from 
the atmosphere into the blood and (2) of carbon dioxide from the blood into the 
atmosphere. To accomplish this, air must pass into and out of the lungs, and the 
respiratory gases must diffuse through the lungs into the circulation and vice 
versa. Although exercise has not been shown to affect this diffusing ability, 
exercise training does strengthen the muscles of respiration. This means that a 
trained individual can move more air through the lungs per time unit, and 
forced vital capacity (i.e., the maximum volume of air that can be exhaled after 
a full inspiration) may be increased. 
 
Warming up, conditioning and fatigue. 
A warm-up is an activity or activities, which prepare you both mentally and 
physically for further more intense activity or training. It should be continuous 
movement utilizing a variety of movements, which will result in increased heart 
rate, core temperature, and dynamic range of motion. In a warm-up you 
basically want to get the entire body warm, loose, and a little sweat on the 
forehead. You should now be ready mentally and physically to begin an intense 
training session. The warm-up should increase your productivity in the work 
out and also reduce your risk of injury. 
Purpose: Body movements, increase blood flow to muscles, joints, raise core 
temperature, active flexibility, teaching/learning of body awareness and control. 
The warm up activities are a crucial part of any exercise regime or sports 
training. The importance of a structured warm up routine should not be under 
estimated when it comes to the prevention of sports injury. 
The Warm Up 
An effective warm up has a number of very important key elements. These 
elements, or parts, should all be working together to minimize the likelihood of 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 396 
 
sports injury from physical activity. Warming up prior to any physical activity 
does a number of beneficial things, but primarily its main purpose is to prepare 
the body and mind for more strenuous activity. One of the ways it achieves this 
is by helping to increase the body's core temperature, while also increasing the 
body's muscle temperature. By increasing muscle temperature you are helping 
to make the muscles loose, supple and pliable. 
An effective warm up also has the effect of increasing both your heart rate and 
your respiratory rate. This increases blood flow, which in turn increases the 
delivery of oxygen and nutrients to the working muscles. All this helps to 
prepare the muscles, tendons and joints for more strenuous activity. Keeping in 
mind the aims or goals of an effective warm up, we can then go on to look at 
how the warm up should be structured. 
Obviously, it is important to start with the easiest and most gentle activity first, 
building upon each part with more energetic activities, until the body is at a 
physical and mental peak. This is the state in which the body is most prepared 
for the physical activity to come, and where the likelihood of sports injury has 
been minimized as much as possible. So, how should you structure your warm 
up to achieve these goals? 
There are four key elements, or parts, which should be included to ensure an 
effective and complete warm up. They are: 
1. The general warm up 
2. Static stretching 
3. The sports specific warm up 
4. Dynamic stretching 
All four parts are equally important and any one part should not be neglected or 
thought of as not necessary. All four elements work together to bring the body 
and mind to a physical peak, ensuring the athlete is prepared for the activity to 
come. This process will help ensure the athlete has a minimal risk of sports 
injury. Let us have a look at each element individually. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 397 
 
 
1. General warm up 
The general warm up should consist of a light physical activity. Both the 
intensity and duration of the general warm up (or how hard and how long), 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 398 
 
should be governed by the fitness level of the participating athlete. Although a 
correct general warm up for the average person should take about five to ten 
minutes and result in a light sweat. The aim of the general warm up is simply to 
elevate the heart rate and respiratory rate. This in turn increases the blood flow 
and helps with the transportation of oxygen and nutrients to the working 
muscles. This also helps to increase the muscle temperature, allowing for a 
more effective static stretch. 
2. Static stretching 
Static stretching is a very safe and effective form of basic stretching. There is a 
limited threat of injury and it is extremely beneficial for overall flexibility. 
During this part of the warm up, static stretching should include all the major 
muscle groups, and this entire part should last for about five to ten minutes. 
Static stretching is performed by placing the body into a position whereby the 
muscle or group of muscles to be stretched is under tension. Both the opposing 
muscle group (the muscles behind or in front of the stretched muscle), and the 
muscles to be stretched are relaxed. Then slowly and cautiously the body is 
moved to increase the tension of the muscle, or group of muscles to be 
stretched. At this point the position is held or maintained to allow the muscles 
and tendons to lengthen. 
This second part of an effective warm up is extremely important, as it helps to 
lengthen both the muscles and tendons which in turn allow your limbs a greater 
range of movement. This is very important in the prevention of muscle and 
tendon injuries. The above two elements form the basis, or foundation for a 
complete and effective warm up. It is extremely important that these two 
elements be completed properly before moving onto the next two elements. The 
proper completion of elements one and two, will now allow for the more 
specific and vigorous activities necessary for elements three and four. 
3. Sport specific warm up 
With the first two parts of the warm up carried out thoroughly and correctly, it 
is now safe to move onto the third part of an effective warm up. In this part, the 
athlete is specifically preparing their body for the demands of their particular 
sport. During this part of the warm up, more vigorous activity should be 
employed. Activities should reflect the type of movements and actions which 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 399 
 
will be required during the sporting event. 
4. Dynamic stretching 
Finally, a correct warm up should finish with a series of dynamic stretches. 
However, this form of stretching carries with it a high risk of injury if used 
incorrectly. It should really only be used under the supervision of a professional 
sports coach or trainer.Dynamic stretching is more for muscular conditioning 
than flexibility and is really only suited for professional, well trained, highly 
conditioned athletes. 
Dynamic stretching should only be used after a high level of general flexibility 
has been established. Dynamic stretching involves a controlled, soft bounce or 
swinging motion to force a particular body part past its usual range of 
movement. The force of the bounce or swing is gradually increased but should 
never become radical or uncontrolled. During this last part of an effective warm 
up it is also important to keep the dynamic stretches specific to the athlete's 
particular sport. This is the final part of the warm up and should result in the 
athlete reaching a physical and mental peak. At this point the athlete is most 
prepared for the rigors of their sport or activity. 
Neck Rotation 
 Relax 
 Slowly roll your head around in a full circle, keeping your back straight 
 You may feel the need to hold the stretch at a particular position if it 
feels tight, but do not strain 
 Continue for approximately 10 seconds 
Shoulder Rotation 
 Slowly rotate one shoulder at a time 
 Rotate in forward and backward directions in a large circular motion 
 Continue for approximately 10 seconds in each direction 
Trunk Rotation 
 Place hands on hips 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 400 
 
 Rotate trunk, bending forward, to right, backward and to left 
 Continue for approximately 10 seconds 
Rock Squat 
 From a standing position, slowly lower hips to squatting position 
 Rock back and forth several times, attempting to squat progressively 
lower 
 Turn and face to the right, straightening right leg and stretch right 
hamstring 
 Hold stretch for 10 seconds 
 Repeat for left leg 
Hamstrings Stretch 
 From lunge position, place knee on ground, lean forward on top of thigh 
 Slide back leg as far back as possible 
 Keeping chest on thigh, move hips back, straightening out forward leg 
 Relax and hold for 10 seconds 
 Slowly return to standing position 
 Repeat for opposite leg 
Arms Back (Chest/Shoulder Stretch) 
 From a seated position, place hands on ground with arms behind torso 
 Slowly move hips forward until stretch is felt in chest and shoulders 
 Hold stretch for 10 seconds 
Knee Over (Back Stretch) 
 Lay back with knees bent 
 Pull right leg across your body 
 Keep upper back, head and shoulders flat on the floor 
 Hold for 10 seconds 
 Repeat for other side 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 401 
 
Modified Hurdle 
 Sit with right leg straight, keeping foot upright 
 Tuck left foot into the inside of the right thigh 
 Slowly bend forward from the hips toward the right foot, keeping your 
back straight 
 Bring your chest to your right thigh 
 Relax and hold for 10 seconds 
 Repeat for opposite leg 
 (Piriformis Stretch) 
 Place left foot over right knee and lie back 
 Grasp right shin and slowly bring right knee to chest 
 Relax and hold for 10 seconds 
 Repeat for opposite leg 
Butterfly 
 Sit with soles of your feet together, holding onto your toes 
 Use your elbows to gently push to the inside of your thighs until you get 
a good, even stretch 
 Relax and hold for 10 seconds 
 Repeat 
Lunge (Hip Flexor Stretch) 
 Move right leg forward until right knee is directly over the right ankle 
 Keeping back leg straight, gently lower your hips to create an easy 
stretch in the front of the hip 
 Hold for 10 seconds 
 Repeat for other leg 
Quadriceps Stretch 
 Maintain position with one knee on ground 
 Grasp shin with and pull lower leg toward hamstrings 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 402 
 
 Slowly lean back toward ground, keeping your back straight 
 Relax and hold for 10 seconds 
 Repeat for opposite leg 
Calf Stretch 
 With hands on ground, move feet back until left knee is nearly straight 
and cross right leg behind left leg 
 Press left heel toward ground to create an easy stretch in the calf 
 Hold stretch for 10 seconds 
 Repeat for other leg 
Basic concept of balanced diet – Diet before, during and after competition 
What is a healthy diet? 
 
 
 
 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 403 
 
The crucial part of healthy eating is a balanced diet. A balanced diet - or a 
good diet - means consuming from all the different good groups in the right 
quantities. Nutritionists say there are five main food groups - whole grains, fruit 
and vegetables, protein, diary, and fat & sugar.  A balanced diet is a diet that 
consists of the right nutrients in the right quantities. Everyone's bodies are 
different and may require different amounts or types of nutrients. The following 
information is for general reference and may not apply to everyone. On this 
page. Fats. There is good evidence that eating a healthy diet can reduce your 
risk of obesity and illnesses such as diabetes, heart disease, stroke, osteoporosis 
and some types of cancer. The food you eat contains several different types of 
nutrients, which are all required for the many vital processes in your body. 
 
What is a balanced diet? 
A balanced diet needs to contain foods from all the main food groups in the 
correct proportions to provide the body with optimum nutrition.  It should also 
be made up of the correct number of calories to maintain a healthy weight, and 
be low in processed foods.  Every person is different and hence the correct diet 
for health may vary from person to person, however by following a diet that is 
varied, covers all foods groups and is low in undesirable nutrients such as 
sodium, saturated fats and sugar, you are well on your way to a healthy body. 
Why is a balanced diet important? 
A balanced diet is one that provides the body with all the essential nutrients, 
vitamins and minerals required to maintain cells, tissues and organs as well as 
to function correctly.  A diet that is lacking in nutrients can lead to many 
different health problems ranging from tiredness and lack of energy to serious 
problems with the function of vital organs and lack of growth and development. 
How to achieve a healthy balanced diet? 
To achieve a healthy, balanced diet, it is important to eat at least three meals a 
day and not to skip breakfast.  Each meal should be composed of a variety of 
foods from each food group and portion sizes should be moderated to control 
calorie intake.  Limiting alcohol consumption is also recommended, the US 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 404 
 
guidelines being one standard drink per day for women and two for men with 
two alcohol free days per week. 
The 2010 dietary guidelines from the U.S. Departments of Health and Human 
Services and Agriculture recommend that a diet that is low in saturated and 
trans fats, cholesterol, added sugar, salt and alcohol should be followed.  A 
diet similar to the DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension or the 
Mediterranean diet) diet is recommended to fulfill these requirements.  Calorie 
intake should also be balanced with physical activity and sedentary activities 
such as watching TV should be reduced. 
 
What Are Calories? 
The number of calories in a food is a measurement of the amount of energy 
stored in that food. Your body uses calories from food for walking, thinking, 
breathing, and other important functions. The average person needs to eat about 
2,000 calories every day to maintain their weight. 
However, a person‘s specific daily calorie intake can vary depending on their 
age, gender, and physical activity level. Men generally need more calories than 
women, and people who exercise need more calories than people who don‘t. 
The following examples of daily calorie intake are based on United States 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) guidelines: 
children ages 2 to 8: 1,000 to 1,400 calories 
active women ages 14 to 30: 2,400 calories 
sedentary women ages 14 to 30: 1,800 to 2,000 calories 
active men ages 14 to 30: 2,800 to 3,000 calories 
sedentary men ages 14 to 30: 2,000 to 2,600 calories 
active men and women over 30: 2,200 to 3,000 calories 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 405 
 
sedentary men and women over 30: 1,800 to 2,200 calories 
The source of your daily calories is just as important as the number of calories 
you consume. You should limit your consumption of ―empty calories,‖ or those 
that provide little or no nutritional value. The USDA defines empty calories as 
calories that come from sugars and solid fats, such as butter and shortening. 
According to the USDA, Americans consume empty calories most often in: 
bacon 
sausages 
cakes 
cheese 
cookies 
doughnuts 
energy drinks 
fruit drinks 
ice cream 
pizza 
sports drinks and sodas 
Why a Balanced Diet Is Important 
 
A balanced diet is important because your organs and tissues need proper 
nutrition to work effectively. Without good nutrition, your body is more prone 
to disease, infection, fatigue, and poor performance. Children with a poor diet 
run the risk of growth and developmental problems and poor academic 
performance. Bad eating habits can persist for the rest of their lives. 
Rising levels of obesity and diabetes in America are prime examples of the 
effects of a poor diet and a lack of exercise. The USDA reports that four of the 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 406 
 
top 10 leading causes of death in the United States are directly influenced by 
diet. These are: 
heart disease 
cancer 
stroke 
diabetes 
How to Achieve a Balanced Diet 
At the core of a balanced diet are foods that are low in unnecessary fats and 
sugars but high in vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients. The following food 
groups are essential parts of a balanced diet. 
Fruits 
Besides being a great source of nutrition, fruits make tasty snacks. Choose 
fruits that are in season in your area. They‘re fresher and provide the most 
nutrients. 
Vegetables 
Vegetables are primary sources of essential vitamins and minerals. Dark, leafy 
greens generally contain the most nutrition and can be eaten at every meal. A 
variety of vegetables will help you obtain the bountiful nutrients that all 
vegetables provide. Examples of dark leafy greens include: 
spinach 
kale 
green beans 
broccoli 
collard greens 
Swiss chard 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 407 
 
Grains 
According to the USDA, Americans consume refined white flour more than 
any other grain. Unfortunately, refined white flour contains poor nutritional 
value because the hull of the grain is removed during the refining process. The 
hull is the outer shell of the grain and is where the majority of the grain‘s 
nutrition lies. Whole grains, however, are prepared using the entire grain, 
including the hull, so they provide much more nutrition. Try switching from 
white breads and pastas to whole-grain products. 
Proteins 
Meats and beans are primary sources of protein, which is essential for proper 
muscle and brain development. Lean, low-fat meats such as chicken, fish, and 
certain cuts of pork and beef are the best options. Removing the skin and 
trimming off any visible fat are easy ways to reduce the amount of fat and 
cholesterol in meats. The health and diet of the animal are important and 
influence the fatty acid profile of the meat, so grass-fed choices are ideal. 
Other good sources of protein, which contain many other health benefits, fiber 
and other nutrients, include nuts and beans, such as: 
lentils 
beans 
peas 
almonds 
sunflower seeds 
walnuts 
Tofu, tempo, and other soy-based products are excellent sources of protein and 
are healthy alternatives to meat. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 408 
 
Dairy 
Dairy products provide calcium, vitamin D, and other essential nutrients. 
However, they‘re also major sources of fat, so it‘s best to choose small portions 
of full-fat cheeses, and reduced-fat or fat-free milk and yogurt. Plant-based 
milks, such as those made from flaxseed, almond, or soy are typically fortified 
with calcium and other nutrients, making these excellent alternatives to dairy 
from cows. 
Oils 
Oils should be used sparingly. Opt for low-fat and low-sugar versions of 
products that contain oil, such as salad dressing and mayonnaise. Good oils, 
such as olive oil, can replace fattier vegetable oil in your diet. Avoid deep-fried 
foods because they contain a large number of empty calories. 
The USDA has an online calculator that can help you determine how much of 
each food group you should consume daily. 
Aside from adding certain foods to your diet, you should also reduce your 
consumption of certain substances in order to maintain a balanced diet and a 
healthy weight. These include: 
alcohol 
refined grains 
solid fats 
saturated fats 
trans fats 
salt 
sugars 
 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 409 
 
The key to a healthy, balanced diet is: 
eating the right amount of food to achieve and maintain a healthy body weight 
eating a wide variety of foods in the right proportions – this is what balanced 
means 
The range of foods in your diet should include: 
plenty of fruit and vegetables 
plenty of bread, rice, potatoes, pasta and other starchy foods – choosing 
wholegrain varieties where possible 
some meat, fish, eggs, beans and other non-dairy sources of protein 
some milk and dairy foods – choosing lower-fat varieties where possible 
just a small amount of foods high in fat and sugar 
Carbohydrates are the body‘s main source of fuel during exercise. A diet high 
in carbohydrate-rich foods such as whole grain products, vegetables, fruits and 
legumes, can help you exercise longer and faster. 
 
  
 
How should I eat before a competition? 
 
One to six hours before a competition, eat a meal that is high in 
carbohydrates and low in fat, like rice and veggies. If the event is less than four 
hours away, eat enough so that you won't get hungry but not so much that you'll 
be full and uncomfortable. 
Two hours before, drink at least two cups (16 ounces) of water or fruit juice. 
Avoid beverages that have caffeine. They can cause dehydration. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 410 
 
Within 15 minutes before, drink two cups (16 ounces) of cold water. 
Hint: If your event is in the morning, eat a carbohydrate-rich dinner and 
bedtime snack like frozen grapes the night before. Then eat a light meal in the 
morning. This should be high in carbohydrates too.  
 
The size and timing of a meal or snack before an intense workout depends on 
your individual needs. The longer the time between eating and activity the more 
you might be able to eat. Approximately 2 – 4 hours before an endurance event, 
drink plenty of fluids and try to eat a meal high in carbohydrates (e.g. grain 
products, fruits and vegetables), relatively low in protein (small servings of 
choices such as chicken, beans, or hummus), and fibre and low in fat. This may 
help to: 
boost energy levels 
prevent hunger 
keep you hydrated 
extend your time to exhaustion 
Some people experience an upset stomach if they eat a meal before endurance 
activity. A liquid snack such as a sports drink or smoothie is a good alternative. 
  
Carbohydrate-rich snack examples include some sport bars, fruit, and cereal 
with milk, lentils, bagels, pasta, yogurt, and homemade granola bars. 
 
  
"Carbohydrate-loading" (for competitive activities that last longer than 90 
minutes) has been found to build extra carbohydrate energy stores in the body 
(as muscle and liver glycogen). However, it may not offer additional benefits to 
performance if you follow a high-carbohydrate diet or eat a carbohydrate rich 
snack before and/or during exercise. 
 
   

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 411 
 
 
 During a competition? 
 
Every 15 minutes drink half a cup (4 ounces) of cold water. 
Hint: If your event is an endurance event that lasts an hour or more, like long-
distance running, you need carbohydrates as well as water, so drink a mix of 
half fruit juice and half water, rather than plain water, or have a sports drink.   
During intense exercise that lasts longer than one hour, eating carbohydrate 
might help extend time to exhaustion and may improve performance in some 
activities such as sprints and agility drills. Approximately 30 – 70 g of 
carbohydrates per hour (such as in the form of a sports drink), in small amounts 
every 15 to 20 minutes, can improve exercise performance. 
 
For activities lasting longer than an hour or in extreme heat, sports drinks 
provide hydration as well as carbohydrate. It is important that you drink enough 
during and after exercise to replace the fluid you lose in sweat. To find out how 
much you typically sweat during training or competition weigh yourself before 
and after exercise. Factor in how much you drank. The difference will be sweat 
losses. 
 
After a competition? 
Right away and throughout the rest of the day, catch up on the fluids you lost 
through sweating. Sweat is mostly water. Try to drink two cups of fluid that 
contain carbohydrates (fruit juice, milk, soy milk, sports drinks, or watery 
foods, like soup) for every pound you lose during your activity. To do this, you 
need to weigh yourself before and after the event. Otherwise, just drink several 
cups of fluid. You can't overdo it. Your body will just get rid of the extra fluid. 

Sri Satya Sai University of Technology and Medical Sciences  
Page 412 
 
Within several hours, eat a high-carbohydrate meal. This will refill your 
muscles' supply of glycogen. Once your activity is finished, your body is ready 
to store energy again, repair muscles and fill up with fluids. Carbohydrate eaten 
within 30 minutes of exercise and again every two hours for four to six hours 
will replenish glycogen stores. Meals or snacks should also contain protein for 
building and repairing muscle and fluids for rehydrating. 
 
Immediately after endurance exercise, good choices would be a smoothie 
(blend milk, fruit and ice together), sport drink, chocolate milk and water. Soon 
after exercise choose a meal or snack rich in carbohydrate and protein. For 
example: chicken or fish with brown rice and tender-crisp steamed vegetables 
pasta and meat sauce with a leafy green salad vegetarian chili with a whole 
grain roll. 
It's great to have exercise goals and challenges, especially with endurance 
activities. Well-planned healthy eating before, during and after your long 
exercise events can help make your experience even more enjoyable! 
 
 
 
 
 
 

